Take a look at this report.
here is the virtual campaign message.
bahraini in alaska haitham salman wonders why there are bars of soap hanging from the pear trees in the backyard of his new home.
the blogger also links to a podcast in which omer is interviewed.
All the phones were ringing.
park s socialist party filed an online petition ko denouncing such decision as an abuse of the national security law which is an icon of the military authoritarian regime era.
May I see your driver's license?
coca leaves on a table at a coca growers meeting photo by jusada cc by nc sa.
the possible links between jamaican culture and halloween get geoffrey philp blogging about death and the sacrifices that our ancestors made for us to be here.
Fill it up.
argentina i don t believe in schools but i do believe in education global voices.
a photo posted by juliya samokhvalova ptiz siniz on oct at am pdt.
How much is this watch?
He's my older brother.
clarissa ward clarissaward december.
girls in costume resting at the side of the street during the notting hill carnival children s parade sunday august photo by cristiano betta.
yakovleva didn t appreciate the message however and asked not to be bothered again.
dear world.
Be sensible.
I don't recommend that.
those were the words fr used by albert ii king of the belgians to announce on tuesday july his intention to abdicate as queen beatrix of netherlands did last april in favour of his year old son philippe due to his age and delicate health in fact king albert will be years old in as he said in his speech fr an age never reached by my predecessors on the exercise of their function and has undergone multiple surgical procedures fr among them a quadruple coronary bypass on april.
let them eat crack reads this graffiti in new york image by flickr user omiso.
She rides a motorcycle well.
Close your eyes.
some facebook pages like humans of nicaragua humans of panama and humans of santiago chile ask users to contribute photographs to the project others like humans of quito humans of lima humans of peru and humans of asuncion have been created less than a month ago.
cuidemos el voto is built on ushahidi an open source platform that allows citizens to send information in a quick and easy way through cellphones and internet with the purpose of coverage during crisis it collect reports links photos and video and places them on a map where the information can be filtered the motor has been used recently for media coverage in early news network al jazeera used it for reports on the war on gaza and later an independent project used it for surveillance on swine flu.
an online facebook page translating as i am shuhrat kudratov from tajik was created shortly afterward.
The rear-view mirror fell off.
Tom served two terms in Congress.
us politics no thanks pass the tomatoes global voices.
My house is near the school.
first the secrecy surrounding online censorship and repression makes it extra difficult to be accurate not a single week passes without stories of arrests of yet another online journalist or activist in countries like egypt or iran but the details and reasons are often shrouded in mystery.
the liberalization of media is apparently on its way and a new text is expected by mid yasmine rejoices yasmine recalls the difficulties in holding reunions in the past after the state of emergency law n of was lifted this law that rules over the right to hold peaceful meetings was enforced yet again later it is a very strict law as franck la rue united nations special rapporteur for the promotion and protection of the freedom of expression opinion assessed in a mission report issued last june but yasmine explains.
gv what do you consider the role of education to be in the process of peace in colombia these days.
students at other iranian universities including kirmanshah university have previously made allegations of sexual harassment from officials without consequences in this case the evidence of citizen media was clear students protested for one week before the vice president was finally suspended the president of the university apologized and thanked students.
iran dr sohrab razaghi human rights activist arrested global voices.
according to the jakarta post the abductors ask raisya parents for ransom about idr million to million interestingly the mastermind of the kidnapping was the husband of raisya s quranic teacher meaning that the suspect was a person whom the unfortunate kid knew very well.
I shouldn't have told you anything.
toronto canada.
ellery at the global voices summit in january photo jeremy clarke.
Do you like it?
This table is reserved.
Tom doesn't seem to be responding to the treatment.
I'll make you happy.
You have a bright future.
if good ideas transcend boundaries this one does it by bicycle that is by bicicloteca pt a bicycle that carries a small library through the city of sao paulo brazil.
Be merciful.
This is my house.
I'm very happy.
at that time when global voices door opened for me i didn t have a job and all my friends were wondering why in the world i was taking on work and not expect any payment i told them that i was going to do what i loved it was not all about the money and that it was an opportunity to tell uganda s stories.
How pretty you look today!
egyptian cyber activist wael ghonim who shot to international fame after being arrested at the beginning of the egyptian revolution is facing criticism from the very same egyptians who earlier championed for his release.
in december egypt blocked facebook s free basics mobile app while many were quick to focus on the blocking as an act of censorship multiple outlets reported that the blocking was due to facebook s refusal to let the egyptian government spy on users of the app.
lebanon getting ready for another war global voices.
moreover netizens are criticising the precarious way in which such potential radioactive material was manipulated in the first place.
why are the vietnamese thin.
Rabbits have long ears.
uzbekistan s architectural gems preservation and destruction global voices.
videos of snow in baghdad.
demonstrators gathered in monastiraki photo by author.
My father contracted pneumonia last month.
from our partners.
a memorial called the crying eye remembers the approximately people that died due to armed conflict in peru hypathia s daughter posts pictures of this sculpture in lima which was recently defaced.
it is no longer acceptable in tunisia to arrest threaten or intimidate tunisian citizens for their opinions freedom of expression is a red line a number of activists from nawaat al machad and others like fatma arabicca and ale ben abdallah have launched an action of support to free mr samir feriani.
from zero to superhero global voices.
You'd better go to see your family doctor at once.
gigazine has an article ja with screenshots that teach how to use the emergency messaging service that s been set up by the phone companies.
Where are you going?
centralizing online filtering could endow the government with a sort of moral custodianship over jordanian internet users telling them what content they should or should not access said reem almasri research director for the amman based media organization iber which declined to seek a license for their website under the new law the iber site has been blocked twice in jordan since last year.
why don t africans become more advanced.
have the ability to work independently in an unstructured work environment and to work with a virtual community.
as attorney freddy centurion points out the defeat of the life long constitution in peru was the beginning of the end for the liberator from then on his dream would be demolished like a house of cards as he was condemned and exiled in colombia where he died from tuberculosis in.
but this was when uber awarded you for every trips and they kicked me an extra rubles sadly there aren t any bonuses like that anymore rustam said.
Is she your sister?
west asia games asian games asian cup and world cup all show qatar s strategic planning.
Tom drinks coffee every day.
funny how tastes can change.
I owe her 100,000 yen.
most of the lives lost during the orlando massacre were puerto ricans global voices.
carlos garcia carlosgarciareq es and mirian de aristimuno miriamjsdea es presented their fingers painted in violet under the hashtag yavote es i already voted.
I'm on the list.
hadi nili a journalist and global voices author.
we think we are onto something big but with initiatives like this we need help thank you.
moldovann writes about the traffic chaos in ukraine.
the hot summer in the northern hemisphere is forcing many people to seek ways in which to escape the high temperatures or get some relief these next images and videos show how with creativity and ingenuity people young and old find ways in which to beat the heat.
He's not breaking the law.
When did you get married?
gv do you know of other examples of initiatives for the use of national languages through the engagement of bloggers in west africa.
I'd like to work in Boston.
netherlands hustling a creative job through twitter global voices.
I'm not tired at all.
part featuring sharat chowdhury bn.
Can you pick me up at the station?
You're joking!
mali begins touareg dialogue image by flickr user magharebia cc by.
What are you looking at?
perez s introductory manual to natural gynecology image used under the creative commons license.
Earth is a beautiful planet.
chergaoui fr also mocked the spanish for their ignorance.
in an effort to increase profits the telecommunications companies in syria could roll out similar services the new services might give citizens the illusion that their communications were protected when in reality they would be just as vulnerable as regular calls.
afghan bloggers irritated by iranian tv series global voices.
argentina stranded italian tourists global voices.
culture of racism and discrimination in lebanon is a new blog which aims to break the traditional ways in which research has been presented about racism and discrimination by being an online journal and by incorporating the use of social media tools.
the monopoly of online literature also restricts readers choice one reader complained on weibo.
all links lead to spanish language websites unless otherwise noted.
because everything you say has another definition.
Hawaii is a popular tourist resort.
i am impressed by qatar and pleased that qatar won i admire their dedication and effort this is something really nice.
Living with Tom isn't easy.
photo of the city of rasht in northern iran from from kourosh ziabari blog.
is italy ready for an african born government minister donata columbro asks.
She speaks English very fluently.
city market of battambang.
be sure to join us online today for day two.
the appeal was relayed on social media.
this post is cross posted from syria untold.
in riding the backlash of another presidential impeachment process a plebiscite asked brazilians about their preferred system of government with time on tv to defend their idea the monarchists received only percent of the public s support today this scenario doesn t seem to have changed a crowdfunding campaign to fund the monarchy s publicity on the internet managed only percent of its goal of brl.
She cooked herself a good meal.
tahririeh khamoush reports fa an explosion occured at a military base in azimieh district in karaj near tehran the blogger has published a photo regarding this story read more here.
translated from burmese by thet ko ko.
Why can't you come?
notes from the gvmeetup in cairo global voices.
Please be serious.
Continue working.
I baked an apple pie.
I'll give you anything but this.
election precinct results from ufa.
aboood iraq feb to the damn elected government people have every right to protest if you have a problem with that then you should leave.
creative budapest window art photo courtesy of alternative budapest.
My father and my brother work in this factory.
jailed netizens.
kurdish media outlets are abuzz with a photograph of a peshmerga woman sitting beside an automatic weapon breastfeeding her child the picture has been widely distributed on social networking sites highlighting the strength of kurdish women and the resilience of female combatants in the ongoing fight against isis.
global voices gv what is the situation with blogs in paraguay.
How did you know that?
here s manawer performing it in front of the judges and a live audience.
Make your choice.
the way tatsuya hangs up clothes is really gross there s no way i can put on the white t shirt i was planning to wear tomorrow.
Go to your room!
the brazilian supreme court justice who was presiding over operation carwash a massive corruption probe that has helped jail dozens of business executives and politicians died in a plane crash on thursday leaving brazilians worrying about the future of the operation as many fear the crash may not have been an accident.
Her hat looked very funny.
needless to say congratulations blogoma may you continue to generate interesting exciting and thought provoking posts and may the freedom to express your ideas continue.
The solution he proposed was completely out of the question.
If you have nothing to do, why not read a book?
on qatari adventures expat blogger sybil knox explained her elation.
There are a few apples on the tree, aren't there?
the fourth arabloggers meeting is set to take place from january in amman jordan.
the shoe.
juan arellano mary aviles ellery roberts biddle marianne diaz lisa ferguson weiping li and sarah myers west contributed to this report.
china and singapore illegal baby global voices.
but.
How fascinating!
cuidemos el voto calls for mexican citizens to report any irregularity they witness or they learn through media reports can be sent in several ways.
iraq saudi bans al hayat global voices.
Hey, get off my bike.
Is the bank far from here?
I'd like for Tom to tell you why he did what he did.
mung ra lu ra and la awng were among those who voted for the nld believing that it would not ignore their wishes but now they are not so sure.
I wish she would stop playing that stupid music.
egypt sad day for syria global voices.
Why did you lie to me?
nobody questions whether there is a democracy in new york this is where most people make a mistake i have tried to explain that we are different we are a city we are not a country.
this is how anna describes uk the life of the village with world war ii looming on the horizon.
I thought you two knew each other.
a homeless man who makes a living collecting paper photo by alejandro rustom copyright demotix.
I bought a book yesterday.
why a year old brazilian indigenous leader spent hours in a tree global voices.
That won't happen.
The police accused him of murder.
I'm finding it difficult deciding on which one to buy.
internet governance.
It's a funny story.
the porno allergy doesn t seem to be abating your middle east recalls the attempts by egyptian officials to stop internet users appetite for sex sites in egypt such websites are prohibited by law but not blocked according to google trends the country ranked th worldwide in for search requests such as sex.
There's been a lot of rain this year.
kuwait annoying columnist global voices.
He is speaking English.
We kept them quiet.
He lost two sons in the war.
the video below is a list of six tongue twisters in lezgi but perhaps they should be called throat twisters instead since piotr koz owski a lezgi language learner and the founder of a website dedicated to lezgi confided that trying to pronounce them feels like it may do terrible damage to your throat.
Are your hands clean?
al ghad issued a statement giving an urgent warning that an imminent massacre of the people of sadr city is being planned.
in just a few hours nine people on three continents five countries and seven cities have collaborated to spread the story of the cry of resistance of the guarani kaiowa to the world in portuguese and english.
christmas cookies by photolinda on flickr cc by nc.
thank you for your support and wishing you a filled with joy and peace.
The answer is actually quite simple.
I don't like swimming in salt water.
I remember the event as clearly as if it had happened just yesterday.
the victims were exhumed from a mass grave in may and returned to their families on november.
You will see the difference.
I trust you.
He looks very good.
She despises him only because he is poor.
as the rumors about trump being backed by putin spread more russian facebook users joined the discussion ilya yablokov a historian and conspirology expert wrote some of the ideas that pop up in the op eds linking putin and trump remind me of the allusions used by the mccarthyists in the s the irony however is that today it s the left wing intellectuals who spread them.
I love that chair.
Do not interfere!
are communications in damascus down global voices.
How do you know that?
kenyan blogger abantu feels like an american america votes i have never been an american probably never will be but this morning i feel like an american.
mural artist mona caron uses city walls all over the world as canvases for her magnified portraits of wild plants she says they represent what survives at the margins of society and she wants us to pay closer attention.
All roads lead to Rome.
Isn't she a doctor?
vloggerdanismyuncle in south korea also speaks about the recent kidnapping somalian pirates perpetrated on a thai ship and how after ransom payment they set their hostages free and then sailed on to commit more crimes.
an israeli company has been contracted to install a civil surveillance system in abu dhabi reports mee.
Do you know anyone in Australia?
She came to Japan as a child.
filipina gabriela nilapa narrates how she was repeatedly raped by her lebanese boss in a qatar office in this post on qatar living.
Were you at school at that time?
I didn't study math at all.
imad moustapha syria s envoy to the us shares with us photographs from a celebration to mark his country s independence day in washington dc the huge attendance was a testimony to how syria is regarded by the american people despite years of trying to distort its image by former president bush his kick side cheny and their acolytes of hate mongers he writes.
What a beautiful design!
Why didn't they say something?
Look out!
in perhaps the most emotional moment of the opening ceremony the crowd rises to give the georgian athletes led by alpine skier iason abramashvili a standing ovation following the tragic death of year old luge athlete nodar kumaritashvili earlier in the day photo s yume licensed under creative commons.
when i go to villages and meet people there i take things from their speech their thoughts and their mannerisms i am a terrible thief she laughed.
east timor managing oil resources global voices.
indeed commentators also warn that no matter how strongly the u s and its allies apply pressure on pyongyang the north has enough artillery without nuclear weapons to strike and cause considerable damage to seoul.
the presurfer points us towards this video contrasting two different styles of opening a green coconut to drink the water inside one of them is definitely not for beginners.
surveillance.
Would you tell me what's going on here?
fellow comrades raise your flags difficult times are ahead and then it will be proven who are real greeks who are ethnicists and who are traitors.
journalist haggai matar in a post translated for and republished by magazine shares one perspective from israel.
i hate clowns and i hate hospitals how perfect that the law now brings them together not.
maybe you re wondering how i could choose so casually to switch my voting location from a city in one country to a city way over on another continent under isie rules new york and the hague part of the same electoral district districts for tunisians living abroad are as follows france france germany italy arab world countries americas and rest of europe and in theory you should be able to vote at any voting location within the same district correct.
Place it wherever you like.
I received your letter yesterday.
eleven have established different topics you can focus on beginnings heartbreak make a wish faith routine water courage play darkness beauty and love and with these starting points they will be accepting photographs songs sounds video online content made during november to turn them into a world music collection a two hour documentary and a photography book will be produced and distributed throughout the world.
time to think did the family agree to the organ transplant operation for those without family which institution decides on behalf of executed criminals how their organs are to be used if the family doesn t claim the body who then benefits from the organ transplant.
zoleykha mousavi is a mother without hope she s the mother of a jailed iranian blogger hossein ronaghi maleki who has been on hunger strike for about two weeks mrs mousavi began her own hunger strike on tuesday august to make her voice heard.
political activist asmaa mahfouz reported central security forces arresting people near tahrir square in minibuses the arrests happened as the protests ended and people started to leave.
climate change santa is wearing shades.
calls of this nature have come from the us as well data for black lives a us based network of scientists activists and organizers called attention to evidence of racial and economic discrimination in facebook s platform and advertising technology the group implored facebook to commit their data to a public data trust that would allow researchers to study it in service of the public interest and to hire more african americans on their product and engineering teams.
iran military applause for death penalty global voices.
I need some rest.
cho said he got the information on the secret accounts from anonymous source a claim that he failed to verify until now and that many consider to be a groundless conjecture ko the seoul central district court convicted cho of posthumously defaming the ex president and took him to court custody on february.
algerian nouri discusses his views on ayaan hirsi ali.
When will she return home?
france morrocan woman denied citizenship global voices.
graffiti and urban art voices from latin american streets iii global voices.
Everything was lost.
unrest in the country has led to an estimated deaths since march last year with more than lives lost in a massacre earlier this week.
folk dance rehearsal photo by carmen helena gonzalez used with permission.
narenji bloggers arrest in december screenshot from youtube via freedom messenger.
I would like to ask a question.
Tom hasn't written to Mary in a long time.
turkey s deputy prime minister has said in a statement that authorising the use of force in syria does not amount to a declaration of war but acts as a preventive measure this was followed by a statement from turkey s prime minister who said.
sina com blogger eastisred who appears to be an employee of the wolong nature reserve in wenchuan sichuan the hardest hit area in last month s earthquake has recently started a blog and has been posting photos of the eight olympic pandas who once lived there.
You can't do two things at once.
germany munich.
Do you want me to help you do that?
rv this will take me back to another point you previously said that you worked for a while in the civil society in italy so what are the differences you observed between the civil society in egypt and italy.
farrad writes in the iranian com blog.
next week in amman th arab bloggers meeting ab global voices advox.
the task before iranians is to bring an end to the crisis to unite with our arab brothers and sisters to overcome the damage wrought by the regime and to join with the ethnic groups such ahwazi arabs kurds baluchis turks and turkmen in their struggles for self determination united we can rebuild the region and save all our peoples before the iranian regime drags us all over the precipice into a chasm of sectarian bloodletting and chaos.
carmen velez la generala who commanded three hundred men.
Mathematics is difficult for me.
the original facebook event has inexplicably disappeared since sunday october.
Place it wherever you like.
A hundred and fifty diplomats came to that conference.
the language classes have become an important venue for community building one student interviewed in the video below is rahel zegeye a migrant worker from ethiopia who over two years put all of her earnings towards making a feature film about the experience of domestic workers in lebanon.
the campaign relies on a website es a twitter account remangate es and a hashtag es through which one could and can follow different opinions such as that of gustavo gutierrez jahman who asks.
nepal hillary and the everest global voices.
Here's the address.
We all had such a good time.
bahrain new restriction on media global voices.
That's the fastest train in the world.
The fire started in the kitchen.
of course this signals that telegram facebook messenger whatsapp and viber should be ready they can either submit to the demands of roskomnadzor and the federal security service and monitor their users or they can be blocked i think we ll see the outcome of these if not in the coming days then in the coming months.
I'll be with you forever.
Mind your own business!
Flowers bloom.
gv what are the obstacles in your eyes to a greater use of new information communication technology in the electoral process in guinea and in west africa as a whole.
nairobi skyline by mutua matheka used with permission.
people s justice in the south.
You can ask him for help.
belarusians get naked and get to work president s orders global voices.
mapping vietnam s socio economic indicators global voices.
indian netizens have exploded with rage and disbelief while expressing their reactions some reactions were sarcastic some were eye opening and some explaining the absurdity of this call.
I like tennis.
more than refugees from different nationalities participated in the music video s production which was funded by the global youth initiative fund a program from the united nations refugee agency unhcr that supports projects led by young refugees.
in the forum was held in johannesburg in brazil will once again host the event credit rodrigo borges delfim migramundo.
I'm just looking.
naim from au debut etait le blog fr said.
the news site al jarida has managed to have access to other secret documents disclosing another scandal committed by jamel and ala the sons of hosni mubarak.
a recent post on facebook informs us that hossein s mother has begun her hunger strike because the authorities do not pay attention to her son s hunger strike and situation.
Many new factories have opened.
maysam bizar tweeted.
I would like a tourist visa.
Never put off until tomorrow what you can do the day after tomorrow.
the lebanese parliament endorsed a law that bans smoking in public or closed spaces the law also bans any sort of tobacco advertising and promotions reports moudz who added that non smokers have been overjoyed today with the news filling up the social timelines with their expressions of approval.
In case of fire, telephone the fire station.
How old is he?
syrian revolution map is a new ushahidi instance launched in syria to track ongoing protests in several cities based on citizen reports of protests security patrols dangerous locations clashes and anticipated gatherings six protesters have reportedly been killed in daraa and dozens have been arrested the website is in arabic some english and french and allows people to send reports using email twitter or a form the site also enables users to sign up for notifications of reports within km miles of any location.
what will calm peaceful sweet mothers do if us president george w bush visits lebanon lebanese blogger jamal ghosn has the answer here.
a court set may as the trial date of poet and columnist fatima naoot accused of insulting islam on social media naoot is facing trial for publishing on twitter and facebook posts critical of the sacrifice of animals during the religious festival of eid al adha.
china turning duck into goose global voices.
in days time on july over people from the four corners of planet earth will gather in nairobi kenya for the global voices citizen media summit moving this number of people across the globe takes some doing and for us on the planning team the past few months have been spent figuring out how to get people from cities like vilnius bamako la paz kolkata and naypyidaw to nairobi booking hotel rooms sorting out visa applications and most of all designing and refining the summit format and program then refining it again.
I saw a bird flying over a tree.
Is that your sister?
broadcaster maisa saleh was fired from her job at orient tv after liking facebook posts critical of the channel s director of orient tv.
and here s her snowbabe and it is up to you to judge.
Do I have to answer all of the questions?
She has never been to Hokkaido.
The last time I went to China, I visited Shanghai.
not all funerals and deaths are anonymous some videos titles carry the first or the surname of the deceased some videos are well known in different social circles this is the case of the funeral of ex convict luidig ochoa who created the popular web based series retelling life in venezuela s prisons as well as and the lives of ex prisoners after jail.
Tom is able to speak three languages well.
Do you love me?
pekinglogy shows the air pollution in beijing with photos and data.
some of these structures are operational thanks to collaboration and agreements reached with local health centres that have replicated the programme.
The car broke down.
You have to come with me.
She asked him for help.
on other side kurir pulled off the article of threatining tone serbs declared war on the actress you do not know what awaits for you angelina from the newspaper official site published as respond on jolie s offensive tweet.
ophthalmological institute photo by busy leon.
You'd be surprised what you can learn in a week.
Who is the woman dressed in pink?
It looks like this house is a total mess.
Right now, it is a half past ten.
I speak a little Slovenian.
ukraine photos from sevastopol s city hospital global voices.
Can you really swim?
Have you been to London?
It was a very big room.
Don't give me any ideas.
from a veil which covers the face but allows women to show their two eyes an islamic scholar from saudi arabia is now calling for a veil which shows one eye only bloggers from the arab world react.
Who drew it?
I caused this.
links of interest.
He killed that man.
It's almost six.
Don't despise a man because he is poor.
iran pro regime forces attacked a mosque global voices.
isulzzxx september.
featured author and translator asteris masouras global voices.
the lake is also home to historical monasteries and churches their relatively isolated location on islands has aided their preservation but as the menacing water hyacinth threatens to clog the entire lake their survival is at stake as well as the livelihoods of all who live near and depend on lake tana as a natural resource.
I don't know when I'll have time to finish reading the rest of this book.
we turned in december so the sixth global media citizen summit in january in cebu city philippines was another moment to celebrate our only regret being that we weren t able to do it with the entire plus active members of the community present.
jordan.
syria appeal by diplomats wives to asma al assad global voices.
global voices community blog global voices wins google digital news initiative.
marko bucik spends his vacation in albania a country that is an endless joy despite the fact that there are almost no street names no mailboxes few places have drinkable tap water.
What is the matter with your car?
china billion mobile phone users global voices.
the patience stone has won the main award at a film festival in tajikistan image from wikipedia.
creative commons licensed photo by john sonderman.
i love my child real love does not hurt instead it uplifts even as it grounds you frees you as much as it gives you a place to come home to sometimes love means you need to be firm but you can do so lovingly i am my child s ally and so are other key adults in his life.
here are a few posts from kuwait about the day.
Tom found that he couldn't study with the TV on.
Eat your veggies.
blockupy protesters take action against banking and finance system photo by patrick gerhard stoesser copyright demotix may.
I don't know you.
Don't argue.
frustrated by the serbian furious reaction jolie responded on twitter.
i am not impressed that psycho fascists do whatever they want without any punishment i don t expect any protection from greek police as probably half of them have voted for golden dawn.
Driving a car is really very simple.
How tall you are!
during last year s challenge we also met language champions who participated by creating memes in berrichon bourbonnais karuk fulfulde wiradjuri quechua and kwakwala memes in hundreds of languages were created and shared online you can see a selection of these memes in this summary post from last year s campaign.
He looks like his father.
Here's my card.
He needs that money.
This is Mary's dog.
A mouse is a timid creature.
You can't buy happiness.
mahfuzur rahman manik reports bn.
there were so many protests both online and within the community in general that the dean jose herman munoz nungo felt obligated to request within the signed agreement the cessation of hostility and psychological violence.
All you have to do is to take care of yourself.
I hope everything goes OK.
sorry world sorry syria we chinese have an evil government michael anti on twitter.
Hello!
My sister lives near Yokohama.
we re all poor guys.
John's house is opposite the church.
I take my camera with me wherever I go.
the blogger adds that for a decade he was not in charge of hezbollah operations.
mohamed elgohary co editor of lingua arabic photo by mohamed alaa guedich used with permission.
this was a luxury i had because i wasn t in an afflicted area but it s probably safe to say that most people were not in a situation where they had absolutely no information at all.
Ottawa is the capital of Canada.
I don't have tattoos.
Tell Tom hi for me.
Why have you come here?
What happened last week?
What did Tom make?
wikimedia s sue gardner joins global voices board global voices.
Local shops do good business with tourists.
blogger fonzi from con la camara en el bolsillo es with a camera in my pocket posts images of a house in montevideo with images of comics painted on its facade.
Tom loves reading.
The peace talks failed once again.
My joints ache.
She is unconscious.
football fans in qatar were ecstatic over the qatari national teams win over iraq in a world cup qualifier greeker described it as qatar s greatest football moment writing.
there was less traffic than i anticipated before my taxi driver could finish his rant about how china must act tougher in the south china sea we d arrived at the road leading to the philippines embassy in beijing what i saw was a familiar scene the police had already cordoned off the area in anticipation of potential protests.
why are lithuanians tall.
I'll drive you home.
You'd better not swim if you've just eaten.
a week after the martial law declaration the government claimed it s already in control of marawi but improving the situation of the bakwit evacuees seems a bigger challenge for local leaders who are now assessing the impact of martial law and the attacks of the maute group.
facebook issued a reporting guide demonstrating what happens when content is reported as abusive by a user the eff calls it a step in the right direction.
vehicles honk past you and leave you in a trail of dust afghans complain of increasing pollution in kabul security personnel man the streets helicopters hover over pedestrians.
When I told Tom that I was hungry, he said he was hungry, too.
I carried three books.
I rushed out to see what was going on.
when my son first read the book he said that it was all about shapes said asel abdyrakhmanova of her ten year old s reaction to kyrgyz author altyn kapalova s square country fairytale.
food jihadist is an american expat living in egypt she shared her experience of fasting for the first time in cairo this year muslims are marking ramadan a month of fasting where food and water are prohibited from dawn to dusk.
All of my roommates are out of town.
continuing to innovate the bicicloteca also takes free solar powered internet access pt wherever it goes and it s not just for the homeless with no restrictions the bicicloteca democratises access to information entertainment and culture for the general public workers and students.
I need to know why you need this.
after the china milk scandal jewelle notes that in malaysia some popular food brands are also allegedly contaminated are we living in the era of contaminated food.
amman resident aseel odeh told global voices gv.
The students learned this poem by heart.
It is certainly possible if you want it.
Have you ever played baseball?
warning graphic video.
Don't worry about what you've done.
I must buy one.
unlike television viewers the television ratings have been low so far fr this transposition of the experiment on television has triggered many reactions from the blogosphere.
mo ha med posted a note about mumtaz el qott s article where he mentioned that egyptians want to get visas to germany to wish president mubarak a speedy recovery after his surgery.
neoclassical baroque with italian reminiscences vanguardist and even eclectic in some cases these domes are not only an excellent heritage that is excellently cared for and appreciated but also a sign of the economic strength that the area once had.
I was in shock.
You ought to be ashamed.
lebanon feminist video rant global voices.
He told me not to drive too fast.
in turkey the slogan savasa hayir which means no to war became top trending topic among twitter users on thursday morning and since the cross border military action mandate has been approved social networks have been divided on the issue creating a firestorm of opinions from activists pundits and the like.
why arabs abroad feel obligated that they must know everyone in their city even arabs in nearby cities who they are were friends with where they buy their shoes from rants rebellious arab girl a palestinian who lives in canada.
It's raining again!
iran has blocked access to google search engine and gmail google s free webmail service mehr news agency reported today i can confirm these sites have been filtered said hamid shahriari the secretary of iran s national council of information.
saudi arabia cairo visit global voices.
a website has been dedicated to neda named we are all neda a quote on the homepage says we did not throw rocks at them we cried we want freedom they shot us both iranians and non iranians are leaving comments in memory of neda on the site so far there are nearly and the numbers are growing rapidly.
a note published by tv itself described adame this way.
sao paulo brazil photo by rodrigo borges delfim.
merzoug touati photo shared on the facebook page of his blog alhogra.
develop contacts with human rights and free expression organizations.
Is it far from here?
Do you know who bought your painting?
I need to study.
I like chocolate.
That's common sense.
on september bolivian bloggers from across the country and some from abroad will gather in santa cruz for the first annual gathering of bloguivianos es this gathering will provide the opportunity for some that have only corresponded through blogs or email to meet in person and participate in a variety of discussions involving bloggers especially involved in those areas.
these collateral consequences are rarely cited in conversations on immigration and enforcement but they highlight the human costs that we collectively pay the united states detains more immigrants than any other country in the world and ice s ballooning budget and expansive detention policies run the risk of reshaping the character of our country.
redrazan two hours ago the internet was cut at least in most neighborhoods in damascus this is troubling news syria.
The magazine comes out every week.
I like the way you treat me.
more videos available on chan ad bahraini blog.
the student answered with a mathematical formula.
palestine mourning mustafa tamimi global voices.
our economy is screwed up big time domestic political turmoil combined with the turbulence in the us financial market is the perfect recipe for a disaster the prospect of a messy change of government which is the first in the history of malaysia is making investors very nervous.
You can hear English on Channel 1, and Japanese on Channel 7.
the universal declaration of human rights and the international covenant on civil and political rights both enshrine the right to freedom of expression as party to both documents the kingdom of bahrain has agreed to protect its citizens rights to speak freely united nations representatives have on multiple occasions stressed that these rights must be applied in traditional media as well as online.
and pinpoints his vantage point.
andres gomez vela andrsgomezv es also pointed out.
Now, let me ask you a question.
Do not accept the world as it is.
My uncle came to see me.
in response to the alleged kidnapping of three israeli teenagers a facebook page emerged entitled until our boys are returned we will kill a terrorist every hour the page which is in hebrew and displays photographs of specific individuals calling for their execution has sparked outrage from many who believe that facebook gives preferential treatment to users from israel in contrast to those from palestine in the company took down a page calling for a third intifada uprising after israeli officials complained that it incited violence against jewish people.
My father is a doctor.
I saw you outside.
You deserve the prize.
life inside a leprosy colony in myanmar global voices.
You must find work.
china olympic pandas now in beijing global voices.
caption will haruki murakami win the nobel prize nobel prize for literature to be awarded this evening screencap from ann news official youtube channel.
a sign at the istanbul anti war protest which reads hands off syria shared by cherine on twitter reposted with permission.
good luck.
It cannot last long.
jmf what are your hopes for this film in particular.
well i m alive the town is dead though and my rooms are a mess.
all this information is available not only in internet but also on hiv aids national hotline.
some of the sudanese twitter users likened the events happening in khartoum to those in other countries in the region and maintained solidarity with those struggling with dictatorial regimes elsewhere khalid ewais a journalist with al arabiya tweeted ar.
I have three cousins on my mother's side.
palestine female genital mutilation global voices.
you will also notice that we ve revamped the pages describing our community and mission to take into account the shifts and changes that have occurred in the ten years since we ve been around.
This is my younger sister.
rahim ahwaz is an iranian human rights activist focusing on ethnic minority rights.
The people of Boston hated the British soldiers.
algeria mauritanian arrested for criticizing government online global voices.
lebanese rania masri writes about a photography exhibition by the children palestinian refugees living in camps in lebanon cameras were placed in the hands of children in all the palestinian refugee camps in lebanon she explains.
shanghaiist collects a series of anime character drawings recreated from the china map.
on their website converted into a wonderful and extensive audiovisual blog the travelers upload all the information interviews and clips that they have been compiling and producing along the way in order to capture their experiences which will be a part of their future documentary they also have a facebook page where they share stories photos and the day to day of their adventure with more than followers.
the ainu talking dictionary preserves and presents conversational ainu in an online searchable format there is also an interface for linguists and detailed notes about how to use the online resource.
window on eurasia reports that saudi arabia has cut russia s hajj quota creating problems for dmitry medvedev.
he won a trip to space but can t move freely on earth global voices.
blue bucket society activists prepare a car for a protest against abuses on russia s roads april lookatme ru.
Do you like tennis?
after this brainstorming session i can t be angry with my therapist and i avoid his gaze he is absolutely right i have to stop my peaceful debate and confess that i am afraid of my personal thoughts.
the volunteer group has only been active since january but already they have managed to attract the attention of both local and international media for their innovative approach to changing the perceptions of both workers and employers among their main achievements are the free language courses they offer to workers learning arabic english or french every sunday.
since the authors will be coming from different continents cultures and backgrounds i am certain the learning curve for the participants will be nothing short of exponential i am also certain that the discussions we will have the moments that we will share will be highlights precious mementos to be cherished over and beyond a lifetime to be among a pool of talent intelligence artistry that the global voices community encompasses is indeed a peak of privilege.
global information society watch includes a chapter by noted bahraini activist ali abdulemam entitled the struggle of online activists against surveillance technology.
a wagon in a saigon road photo from the new york public library digital collections.
child in red pants.
Won't you go?
god is with us will you filter him too photo by cyrus farivar via flickr cc by nd sa.
many reactions were posted on the topic of the teacher s dilemma when confronted with the court s decision to place a constraining order on their strike the court ruled that even if negotiations fail teachers must end the strike by thursday december th.
watching the junior iaaf championships in barcelona in the last few days questions keep on ringing in my head zambians can t throw anything juveline discuss shot putt sic can t do anything in water drop swim etc where are our lozis and ba ku luapula swimming and diving lozis and luapulans are riverine people we can t run watch the boys at manda hill chase for their money even vendors running away from lcc so many poachers and not one can even go into shooting competition so many people fighting we can t compete in judo boxing or wrestling we only can but can t be good at anything.
afsar shaheen comments in a post of luthfispace elaborating why lithography is still being adopted.
Everybody is waiting for you.
the majority of bloggers took part in the white note campaign like ounormal ar metallistication ar who just posted the white note action logo with the caption for freedom of expression and blogging as chiheb did.
Tom once worked as a tour guide.
lebanon questions to expats global voices.
today there was a historical court order against sexual harassment in egypt a victory to laila a victory to all women in egypt.
I read your book.
Tom can't let go of the past.
in order to ensure the maintenance of portuguese among brazilebanese families among other elements of brazilian culture the brazilian government established pt the brazil lebanon cultural center in beirut in april on wednesdays the center shows free movies for the people of beirut most brazilians and descendants.
I'd prefer meat to fish.
is the year of oil and gas in lebanon global voices.
I didn't know how to answer his question.
Why is he here?
according to the un refugee agency unhcr syrian refugees are registered or awaiting registration inside and outside syria more than half of them are under however countless syrian children have been confronted with the anguish of losing their home their belongings and parents the children s rights portal reports.
to understand the current state of lebanese politics you first have to understand why michel aoun s election as president in could have marked the beginning of a new era in lebanese politics.
egypt ask and elbaradei will answer global voices.
I will show you some pictures.
Tom refused to talk to me.
thanks to help of many people around the world the campaign website has already been translated in more than languages including odia sena and lezgian many of these translations came from members of the global voices lingua project a community of volunteer translators.
She is very beautiful.
the committee to protect journalists along with human rights and press freedom groups has called on bahraini authorities to release imprisoned blogger abduljalil alsingace alsingace has been on hunger strike since march he is serving a life sentence for taking part in anti government protests in.
You're kidding!
by killing three israeli civilians these acts of murder represent an ironic tragedy while the shedding of no civilian blood is ever justified how we talk about such acts is important rather than framing it as an isolated incident or as one more heedless palestinian attack we should really examine why construction equipment has become a tool of death and destruction in israel palestine for palestinian the bulldozer is a symbol of israeli aggression one assault with a bulldozer by a palestinian does not change that it only reminds us of the urgent need for a just peace.
thumbnail image from wikimedia commons under creative commons license cc by sa.
It's more difficult than you think.
Is your watch correct?
Yesterday was my birthday.
Does Tom want to come?
You have to come with me.
I'm sorry, but I can't hear you well.
I saw a fox run across the road just now.
Just do the essential repairs, please.
this evening vice president nicolas maduro announced the death of the president of venezuela hugo chavez frias.
Driving a car is really very simple.
jassimalsaady journalists arrested at jumhiriya bridge where injured protesters have been denied assistance iraq feb.
Do you know who he is?
Tom went downtown this afternoon.
This is my office.
Did you do your homework by yourself?
Show me the photos, please.
bahraini blogger mahmood al yousif lashes out at a new restriction on media in the arab world.
egypt the other homeland global voices.
shuhrat qudratov has not been found guilty of being a lawyer for an opposition politician of course his nine year sentence is based on charges of fraud and attempted bribery but tajikistan s civil society despite being under pressure from the government has found its voice to call the charges convoluted and show solidarity with qudratov.
it is called yanga in the middle of intense vegetation in southeastern veracruz a state along the mexican gulf the town of yanga is evidence to the presence and settlement of africans in mexico.
The warning came too late.
Don't translate English into Japanese word for word.
Pass me the salt and pepper, please.
and that is not all a controversy is also brewing in the background regarding a fan page created by an egyptian blogger for queen rania on facebook.
paris france.
I'm ready to leave now.
christmas recipes in global food blogs global voices.
Stand up!
deleted files may easily be recovered by interested parties make sure your sensitive data is not available to others by using data erasure software one of the most popular of such tools is eraser a freeware available for windows it destroys undesirable data by overwriting it several times.
I want a book to read.
and last but not least jad decides that the best snowman he has seen so far is this one.
The boy remained silent.
an international day to end impunity global voices.
for two weeks in may a group of central american free culture and free software activists among others boarded the librebus freebus traveling through the region to the countries of guatemala el salvador honduras nicaragua and costa rica making regular stops to share experiences and knowledge with local communities along the way the entire journey was filmed and recorded and you can see the documentary from the trip here the experience is now being replicated in south america as part of the librebus conosur southern cone.
I think he is angry.
we blog because we care freezone bloggers http bit ly g ijg.
I need time.
it was a special day for us a new experience that brought us as close as possible to a football match the gaza world cup is a project that many would underestimate its value but the idea of this event hits the core of the gaza plight the siege many do not think of the gaza youngsters and their need to play sports this event provides gazans some sense of solidarity mixed with the entertainment of a football match.
This wall is painted green.
yesoo hawija was taken over by protesters and police stations were burnt feb iraq.
local authorities developed in its place a wildlife park advertised as an ecological and landscaping reconquest which would promote the growth of beautiful flora such as orchids and the presence of birds like snipes and sand martins the official website says.
global voices has published an excellent guide to understanding copyright in the arab world.
Stop playing with your hair.
information about the summit can be found at https summit globalvoicesonline org more information about the breaking borders award can be found at http breakingborders net.
yesterday on july th bosnia and herzegovina commemorated the th anniversary of the srebrenica massacre which last year the international court of justice in the hague referred to as genocide against the muslim population of the area.
Welcome back. We missed you.
shahd is one of many children growing up under difficult circumstances in jordan s refugee camps photo noon arabia.
Tom collects old coins.
the nonrequired writes about the success story that is continuing education in some african nations and how it can prevent the brain drain continuing education is paid for by companies and provided by local universities at an affordable cost it has been succesfully implemented so far in countries such as south africa senegal ghana and tanzania fr.
Here comes the bus.
Kids love dogs.
Isn't it black?
I have no time to do my homework.
we are living like trash in a garbage can life is suffocating here.
ramy raouf started his new egyptian blog for human rights ebfhr ar the blog monitors the development of human rights especially in egypt as well as the arab world in general.
there are many more postcards of indigenous leaders educators activists against anti personnel mines and human rights activists.
This doll is a gift from my aunt.
Thank you for inviting me to the party.
Let me see it.
Take as much as you want.
ahmad ar announces to his readers and to syrian bloggers the launch of a new syrian blog aggregator al mudawwen and asks bloggers from his country to add their blogs here.
chile what is poderopedia and how does it work global voices.
let s tour around the world to check out the different celebrations solstice at stonehenge feast of saint john s bonfires in spain inti raymi in peru we tripantu in chile and kupala day in russia or midsummer s night in poland.
Raise your right hand.
chinese technology companies have found themselves at the forefront of developing artificial intelligence ai technology as of this summer they have robust support from the state to continue this work.
floret another balatarin user writes fa that it is time for iranian people to celebrate osama s death in the streets of iran.
old egyptian man showing his inked finger after he voted image by jonathan rashad flickr under cc licence cc by nc sa.
israel a new participatory online video project global voices.
You are new students.
What's my doctor's name?
two bedoon students in jordan write bedoon without using candles posted by alenazi.
I can't play piano.
Please accept my apologies.
I remember locking the door.
This one's crowded, so let's take the next train.
it comes from le matin of all places the spanish discover the existence of blondes in morocco.
athena s cartoon depicting members of the iranian parliament as animals voting on the prohibition of voluntary permanent contraception or vasectomies image taken from free atena facebook page.
English is difficult, isn't it?
meet the saudi woman who ignited a firestorm when she got behind the wheel global voices.
Tom brushes his teeth at least three times a day.
Who said that?
bosco uganda.
from our partners.
a photo posted by catherine afanasyeva kazhetsyatak on oct at am pdt.
tabloid nikkan sports reported that at least one attendee appeared to be confused about why bob dylan was awarded a prize for literature.
I go to school by bus.
Those are my trousers.
acton advises the united states to consult with relevant countries especially china on curbing the pace of north korea s nuclear development and to have more talks.
dmitry anatolevich i demand the withdrawal of russian occupational forces from georgia.
I got scolded severely by that teacher.
Does he have many books?
the government is really intentionally using this xenophobia and fear chung says as a way to keep from granting refugee status particularly for muslims.
and on albert cuesta s tweet we can see some impacience shared by many spaniards.
Haven't you seen the doctor?
happy consumption.
iran no to war global voices.
The Internet is an invaluable source of information.
I've seen that.
israel jewish arab demographics in delicate balance global voices.
but in any case the need for reduction measures is the same for each country so i think that the mass co producers meeting on the third day sitting at the same table will all be at the same starting line for beginning discussions.
jillian who joined global voices in and serves on the board as volunteers representative was awarded for onlinecensorship org a platform she ll develop with colleagues at the electronic frontier foundation where she s director for international freedom of expression currently in alpha the platform will collect data about incidents of censorship on online platforms such as facebook and twitter with the aim of helping society better understand and manage censorship and free expression issues.
I will shoot him.
during the taliban s rule female enrollment in schools was zero and the number of boys enrolled was a million by as the world bank estimates million are attending school including about million girls the literacy rate of women in afghanistan is around photo by aaquib khan.
Could we have a fork?
When will you be back?
mickey jerby posted.
Could I get a little piece of that cake?
while international powers have not agreed on the need to pressure the assad regime global citizens solidarity with syrians has been increasing and it will likely garner more support now that we are reaching the anniversary of the syrian revolution.
My wife is a doctor.
My dog goes everywhere with me.
the national umbrella organization is called unac the national union of peasant farmers and is comprised of small self help groups from the village level up.
You will succeed some day.
Speak up!
photos chinese new year holiday travel rush global voices.
The rain lasted four days.
mauritanian writer and diplomat mohamed mahmoud weddady writes a series of posts in his blog entitled papers about azawad ar about history and people of azawad region this post for instance focuses on the relationship between the azawad and libya.
commenting on this blogpost anon clarified that critics should first read the full transcript of shanmugam s lecture to appreciate the context of his assertion that singapore is a city not a country.
jamaica a halloween story global voices.
I need medical help.
How unlucky I am!
We had a good time playing chess.
Don't mention this to anyone.
aa yes global voices helped me so much and kept me remembered by the online activists in the community i really thank them all they were really true friends i would really thank god for letting me work with them once and i m always thanking my god for all these good friends including global voices i love their work i was following their website to know what s going on and i just wanted to say that your work cheered me up and made my spirits so high when i hear that you talk ed to this ngo or that eu member thank you so much for all that you did for me.
Darwin changed the way we see the world.
I'll sue you.
criticisms are also leveled at the relationship between the road project and the brazilian supported initiative for the integration of regional infrastructure in south america iirsa a development plan to link south america s economies through new energy transportation and telecommunication projects.
it s not enough for the pope to be ashamed of his american paedophile priests as he claimed to be today on his way to the us he also has to do something about them actually a lot more than just something.
Do you know what Tom does for a living?
Do you live here?
Please park in the back.
Go along this street and you'll come to the post office on the left.
while an ex member of the current government carlos tapia carlosetapia believes.
He is getting better.
israel.
venezuela purple fingers on election day global voices.
abdullah el shamy and muhammad ghafari who are among the strikers were working on the live stream continuously updating their twitter accounts and posting pictures from the place.
according to amnesty international more than million refugees from syria per cent are in just five countries turkey lebanon jordan iraq and egypt jordan hosts about of them which amounts to about per cent of the country s total population this is in addition to the large numbers of refugees from palestine and iraq jordan has been hosting over the past several years despite its own socio economic challenges.
Get out!
I thought you didn't know how to do anything.
the fact that these apps are technically illegal did not stop anyone from riding with careem or uber especially in harsh weather conditions.
i worked as a taxi driver for most of my life and saved up in the hope to buy my own taxi someday when i finally did spend my whole life savings to buy a cab we are no longer needed i cannot work as no one uses us yellow taxi cabs anymore and no one wants to buy the taxi since it is no longer a lucrative business.
Have you ever prayed in a mosque?
bint battuta in bahrain visits two shia shrines and posts pictures here.
ulaaa protester in baghdad the government do not care about iraq or the people they re not real iraqis they re scared hiding feb.
They move from place to place.
He often drives his father's car.
Give me a chance!
femme black body image taken from the flickr account of franck rethore under creative commons license.
on april cartoonist tahar djehiche was summoned by police for investigation over cartoons he published on facebook djehiche was accused of defaming and insulting algerian president abdelaziz bouteflika over cartoons opposing the exploitation of shale gas in in salah a town in the center of the country.
He yelled with pain.
photo maria katasonova instagram.
and the following remark.
internet is a blank state here i have to years to establish my start up.
many more stories like liliana s and eliecer s whose postcards can be seen above await their own volunteer storyteller just like other stories await their own illustrator.
Knowledge is power.
Your shoes are here.
Tom isn't here.
this year wikipedia in spanish reached one million articles and released a basic user guide in guarani the idea is to revive the guarani speaking community in this great platform so far there are only articles in that language.
egypt jewish ladies and four men global voices.
She helped the old man cross the road.
the pattern of hopeful expectation and crushing disappointment is so predictable from year to year that it s not an exaggeration to say that murakami nobel hype become an art form in itself it s an all day excursion bookended by optimism and despair.
an ache family photograph by project participant.
singapore license cc public domain.
then there is optimusomnium which shows several examples of peruvian painting of the colonial period in a video.
My clock needs to be fixed.
oman interview with omani photographer global voices.
I like studying history.
in his memory and in recognition of his cyber activism and his sacrifices for a more democratic tunisia march is now the national day of internet freedom in the country.
Tom is outside playing frisbee with his dog.
jing gao from ministry of tofu translated a local feature story about the livelihood of chinese fishermen who can t find fishes near the china coast because of pollution and over fishing.
sandra viviana cuellar was a community leader in cali valle de cauca she defended the natural resources of her community s land from the palm oil industry she was murdered in at age here s her postcard.
carlos arturo gamboa bobadilla cagb my body is really weak after nine days of hunger strike but fortunately according to a medical evaluation i haven t suffered any complications now i have to rest a few days and follow the proper care we strikers left very mentally strengthened we achieved some concrete objectives but above all we made the university of tolima s problem nationally visible in order to resolve the problems they must be acknowledged first and i think that now very few people can remain on the sidelines about the reality we suffer.
a cartoon by badiucao published on september titled northkoreanukes dictators are dictators own nightmare.
and what do all the parties involved have to show for all their efforts since nothing they are all bankrupt.
what you can do.
I'm going through changes.
I went shopping with a friend.
egypt more activists and bloggers arrested global voices.
japan itojun passes away global voices.
What do you think is the best way to get to Tom's house from here?
Tom is a construction worker.
iran s electronic curtain animated by u s state department global voices.
Think about your future.
I need your help.
internet blacklist legislation electronic frontier foundation eff s email campaign against the legislation and eff guide to meeting with your representatives eff also explains how sopa pipa will hurt open source software creation.
you wake up each day on the dirt floor of a shack you and your family lashed together with cast off materials from a nearby construction site for a five star hotel your husband works hours a week sorting chemicals in a badly run pesticides factory lately he s come home coughing up blood he looks thinner and more exhausted each week and you want to tell him to stop but how can you the pennies he earns are the only things feeding your kids.
even in the face of adversity which could have brought an end to the work the whole of sao paulo city showed its goodwill and respect in september the bicicloteca was stolen but significant repercussions from the local media contributed to the equipment s recovery this adversity was transformed into mobilisation on movere pt an online crowd funding platform the video below was used to appeal for thousand reais to build two biciclotecas.
pakistan bomb blast in lahore global voices.
Thanks anyway.
the general thrust these days is oh come on it s all in the past nobody s interested any more it didn t work everyone knows what the americans and israelis are like but stop being naive this is the world there s nothing to be done about it and anyway it who cares but let me put it this way the dead are still looking at us waiting for us to make justice.
this post is part of our special coverage global development.
I'm not allowed to tell what you want to know.
a caviar vending machine at the airport in moscow the cheapest variety costs rubles about yen approximately us the cans are small only centimeters in diameter how much for the biggest can about ten centimeters across i forget the price it was too expensive.
She cooked us a wonderful meal.
I do not think that he will come.
They're washing their hands.
juana ramona la tigresa who took several cities by assault.
Do you know who I am?
update april friends have confirmed that rima dali was released at pm on tuesday saffana baqle and assem hamsho who were with her at the time of the arrest are still missing two other activists ali dahna and hussam zein were arrested today for holding the same banner during a sit in near qasr el adli in damascus.
how has iran the country with one of the most restricted internet environments in the world reacted to pokemon go.
All I can do at the moment is sit here and listen.
over the past few decades there has been more research about the phenomenon than attempts to disseminate their findings to the wider public colombian youtube channel la pulla in spanish the taunt is having a go at it with the seven episode series murder latin america s tragedy in spanish matar la desgracia de america latina.
the country is split the voting shows that the splits are stark too from age to levels of education to geographic borders party politics had little to do with this the lies and the misinformation that was spread during this campaign were poison ugly untruths irresponsible in the deepest sense of the word.
eatbees an american who lives in morocco mentions his nomination and says of blogging in the kingdom.
We were late because of the storm.
Keep your home warm.
although submitted to the parliament more than three years ago the bill has not been adopted yet and several members of parliament mp expressed concerns that it threatens freedoms this delay has angered police unions in november after a police officer died in a knife attack they threatened to stop providing personal protection to mps and political party leaders if the parliament does not approve the bill within two weeks those threats are tantamount to blackmail sharan grewal who researches democratization in the middle east wrote in a paper on the need to reign in tunisia s police unions.
in a blog post in early february alice albright the chief executive officer at the global partnership for education points out that uganda has even factored in refugees in its development plan.
He has his own car.
goodbye online hello https global voices.
al sharif landed in jail she received threats on her life her father had to appeal to the saudi king for her release but the video of her definance behind the wheel had already gone viral receiving more than views in just a day energizing the global moment to drop saudi arabia s prohibitions on women driving.
ann arbor michigan photograph by the author shared with permission.
How can I help?
bahrain blogger in jail for four months global voices.
blogger el houssin ould oumar explains the bigger picture for him the law is a symbol of greater powers trying to impose their rules.
or as everett rummage said on twitter.
video robot shows us how to stay safe online global voices.
syria stalling reform global voices.
going through their right hand tag bar is like flipping through an amazing journey through the streets mountains coasts and deserts of syria.
middle east let it snow.
rebecca mackinnon co founder global voices visiting fellow princeton university center for information technology.
My aunt is older than my mother.
She took her own life.
You must give up smoking.
Keep children away from medicine.
port of spain trinidad and tobago georgia popplewell.
iraq treatment of iraqis in jordan global voices.
Their trip was postponed because of the rain.
the second part of the conference began with the theme the issue of accountability and elimination of the consequences of genocide it was initiated by roger w smith an internationally renowned genocide scholar who studied the turkish government s policy of denial he noted that besides the usual lawsuits and lobbying methods the turkish government has been attempting to downplay the armenian genocide by promoting an equal pain strategy in which it claims that both turks and armenians suffered equally during the chaos of world war i explaining his presence at the conference he quoted milan kundera the franco czech writer who wrote the struggle of man against power is the struggle of memory against forgetting.
The park is filled with children.
Tom pushed Mary down the stairs.
preserving historic thai films global voices.
I don't blame them.
bahraini authorities arrested nine individuals for misusing social media the interior ministry announced on january the individuals risk up to two years in prison under an article in the country s penal code which makes it a crime to offend in public a foreign country or an international organisation based in bahrain activists believe the youths aged between and were arrested for criticizing the late saudi king.
love taking photos on your smartphone now you don t need to wait to get home to upload your high quality educational photos to wikimedia commons the free image repository used by wikipedia and many other projects.
If you alter the plan, you must inform the team members of the changes.
Who died?
vietnam floods global voices.
this nigerian singer has a message for boko haram global voices.
foreign ministers from the nation organization of islamic cooperation oic have called on freedom of expression to be used with responsibility and global legislation to be implemented in order to prevent future acts of violence and hatred.
according to anasonline blog access to wikipedia arabic the arabic language version of the free online encyclopedia wikipedia is now blocked by all isps in syria.
One is Japanese and the other is Italian.
here is a map to the event venue.
Why don't I do that?
Read through the article.
akram al halabi is an artist from the mountainous plateau of majdal shams the largest of the four remaining druze syrian communities on the israeli occupied part of the syrian golan heights despite coming from a contentious region al halabi does not let politics drive his art work rather he utilizes art as a medium to express his search for harmony between nature and humanity.
in sipe sipe cochabamba the man said take this abroad then he began playing his charango photo by mijhail calle used with permission.
What is your size?
only a couple of days until a date that will have people all over the world recording their lives through film and music participate in the eleven project and one day on earth to leave your mark on the world.
the digital defenders partnership which includes global voices and the eff has launched a digital first aid kit to help people identify and address digital threats.
about a week later shipilov followed this post with a bit of creative writing ru composing a script for a fictional television show set ten years in the future titled one day in the life of aman gumirovich tuleyev airing on al jazeera kuzbass the racial overtones in shipilov s script poking fun at the half kazakh half bashkir governor possibly contributed to early reports ru that in addition to article shipilov would also be charged with inciting ethnic hatred under article en.
oman.
blockupy protests against the widespread impoverishment and denial of democratic rights occurring in the eurozone as part of a global systemic crisis shook the financial epicenter of europe frankfurt last week.
Hurry up, or you'll miss the train.
this group of young people in a rural community in honduras also use hip hop to sing about the importance of handwashing in this video aired on local television.
iran history of women s dress and clothing global voices.
There are fifty members in this club.
I decided to be a doctor.
You can't do two things at once.
a coalition of civil society advocates working at the intersection of human rights and technology wrote an open letter calling on government participants in the g summit in argentina to ensure that the evolving digital society supports a healthy web ecosystem and puts people first they touched specifically on the importance of meaningful access to icts privacy and data protection rights freedom of expression cybersecurity and increased competition in digital services.
without two step verification most of us log in to our email accounts simply by typing in a password but many services offer this extra step wherein the system will require an additional piece of proof that you are really you this extra step is based on something the user knows the password and something the user has the mobile.
if you do decide to explore this natural reserve during your stay in madagascar you will need to call upon the services of the professional guides of the madagascar national park mnp there are a variety of walking trails available with circuits ranging from half a day to up to three days during these walks you will cross paths between and meters above sea level.
iran millions have access to internet global voices.
You may go.
madagascar s vanilla beans came from mexico global voices.
emirati blogger and human rights defender ahmed mansoor who is currently serving a year prison sentence for merely expressing his opinions online was targeted with spyware known as finfisher and sold by gamma international which is incorporated in the uk and germany technical research indicates that mansoor was also targeted with software developed by hacking team an italian firm.
on his facebook page rebel painter of horan expressed his cynicism towards the silence of arabs silence following the chemical weapon attack on al ghouta a damascus suburb he shares a drawing of an arab giving a syrian child a pamphlet on how to protect herself from chemical weapons the child responds by giving the arab a pamphlet on how to live with dignity.
How often do you go abroad?
if you can t join us we ll be streaming portions of the program live on january and keep an eye on the summit web site twitter and facebook.
a aa september.
Tom's next crime will be his last.
Whales feed on small fish.
Let's go to my office.
Forget it!
hovic and abd are two friends from aleppo in northern syria they are also among the finest photo bloggers on the blogsphere hovic and abd s blogs named syria looks and syria winks are online show rooms of syria.
No one has failed.
in october a loyalist syrian fashion designer manal ajaj sparked controversy when she posed on the catwalk with models dressed in syrian military uniforms during a fashion show in beirut in what she said was a homage to the syrian army.
Please fill out the attached job application form.
He seldom gives his wife presents.
andrsgomezv some doubts uranio so far no expert has examined or certified whether it is radioactive or not why is it transported like if it were sand.
Is this a picture that you yourself drew?
I thought you might want to come along.
I'm not going unless Tom goes.
Where is the entrance to the museum?
My mother made me a new dress.
the drive up on the nikko highway.
What time do you leave your work?
two arrested in lebanon for facebook posts.
I have a cold.
By signing the contract, I committed myself to working there for another five years.
although the four bloggers quoted above offer excellent perspectives on sexual harassment in morocco each person s experience is unique and none of these should be taken for gospel those interested in further reading on gender issues in morocco might be interested in fatima sadiqi s excellent book women gender and language in morocco or in the following blogs which regularly cover such topics days in morocco the experiences of an american muslim in morocco and the good the bad and the ugly a blog by moroccan american sarah alaoui.
shams ali from kuwait publishes on her blog an image and a thought ar images of artwork pieces that look like rainbows but are made from garbage.
Most of the leaves have fallen.
other medical personnel at the institution are also using twitter last month the hospital shared uk their twitter list and encouraged others to follow.
I want a personal computer.
For a while, I was really addicted to cola and drank it every day.
That has happened to me several times.
Check again.
gv how do you see the future of use of national languages on social media.
meg by keeping up to date with lingua editors i think the larger email groups are getting less functional as a community to community communication platform comparing sub community groups where lingua editors are more knowledgeable about their own communities so via the lingua editors google group as well as the monthly meetings i think i m getting to be up to date with the lingua communities i m also in several lingua google groups using google translate to follow the general idea of conversations happening.
the following paintings belong to aslan s collection of creaturas en limbo creatures in limbo presented here to show some of the artist s other work more can be seen in his blog.
participants at the delhi slutwalk shout slogans and hold banners image by rahul kumar copyright demotix.
Tom attacked Mary with a knife.
the obama era ends on friday with just hours to go until donald trump takes over as u s president the billionaire s supporters across america are likely in a celebratory mood anxiously awaiting the demise of left wing tyranny or whatever else it was that prompted millions of people to vote for the republican candidate last november.
indignant sit ins already depopulated due to summer vacations were raided by police at night and dismantled with restrictions reportedly placed el in some cases to prevent future gatherings as happened later to sit ins in spain and the united states the customary prime minister s opening speech at the thessaloniki international trade fair in september was greeted with angry protests and clashes as disparate groups converged on the heavily policed square outside while another emergency property tax was being announced.
digital citizen is a biweekly review of news policy and research on human rights and technology in the arab world subscribe here.
bolivar played a major role in the emancipation processes of five latin american countries bolivia colombia ecuador peru and venezuela and is considered a universal historical figure he first liberated venezuela and colombia then ecuador creating a large country called the great colombia he then went to peru to assure the defeat of the spanish forces.
She stays in touch with him.
lina eliejat from jordan shares a front page of a newspapers from in this post.
this post is part of our special coverage syria protests.
this flagging off for the shipments of fuel being witnessed today is a mere donation towards the funeral arrangements of the deceased president yesterday fuel tankers left and will have reached malawi this morning.
She answered in tears.
egypt twitter messages from gaza global voices.
anne at mapping the margins describes her attempts to only buy food that is produced locally by palestinians rather than israeli products.
I really miss you.
my work has always been one of educating and my training shows this i have been able to link this knowledge for example with sales administration personal management and quality control but i was trained to detest technology in schools and to consider it imperialist to this day i still can t disagree entirely.
sewerage problems persist in east baghdad according to the latest video report from alive in baghdad.
It was an unexpected opportunity.
a year old christian woman aasia bibi has been sentenced to death in pakistan for allegedly blaspheming the prophet muhammad reports faheem haider.
The rumor isn't true.
while summers are torrid and winter can be unpleasant due to the lack of central heating in most of the country spring and fall provide residents with a brief respite from the climatic extremes that japan experiences the rest of the year.
Tom was naked.
They've come to make trouble.
I'm not OK.
This is the only way out.
lebanese blogger and saint joseph university student mario macaron sent an open letter addressed to lebanon s first lady wafaa sleiman on the issue of women s rights the issue of women s rights in lebanon has recently resurfaced in the wake of the murder of roula yaacoub manal assi and christelle abu chakra by their own husbands as well as the surprising controversy surrounding jackie chamoun s past photoshoot despite its reputation for being a liberal haven in an otherwise conservative region lebanon has a shockingly poor record when it comes to women s rights this lack of basic rights has translated itself from time to time into local grassroots movements but some would argue it has never reached the momentum it s currently at a massive protest by kafa enough ngo is expected on march the th and will be the subject of a special global voices coverage.
I don't like it, either.
You should turn off the light before going to sleep.
the leading characters of this real life story are malena and martin two young people dedicated to inspiring popular education in the neighborhoods of their city and guagua transhumante a renault kangoo diesel truck transformed into a motor home equipped with the basic facilities in order to serve as simple but comfortable lodging as they explain on their website s homepage.
several cities in the northern part of iran are frozen and their gas supply has been disrupted there is also a shortage of bread in cities in such critical circumstances mahmoud ahmadinejad has asked people to reduce their energy consumption and wear warmer clothes.
egyptian blogger tarek says egyptians you ve been punk d following news that egypt s parliament endorsed monday a government bill to raise taxes and fuel prices less than a week after president hosni mubarak announced a per cent salary increase for all government employees.
iran new wave of repression against bloggers global voices.
I love Arabic.
arash kamangir.
this could not be clearer.
however romero also announced es further investigation by the geologic and mining national service sergeotecmin es and the bolivian institute of science and nuclear technology the potential radioactivity of the material remains therefore unclear.
She was almost late for school.
nawaat org publishes a critical comment fr on the most recent unesco report on media in tunisia.
Clearly you are mistaken.
policy given to a policy maker government official or ngo leader who has made a notable contribution in the field.
a medical marijuana vending machine in seattle prices start from.
shirel shirrnoriega august.
the photographs seen here were taken by amer sweidan at the arab bloggers meeting in amman jordan below amer describes the collaborative process of the project.
Has Tom been indicted?
colombia video of art installation and performance in bogota global voices.
Tom didn't fire Mary.
although brazil has today over million mobile lines for a population of around million people there are still five isolated cities without any mobile signal for connection reports pt the journalist eduardo marini.
You never listen. I might as well talk to the wall.
Why did you come to Japan?
a summary of the overall findings of the index and the company report cards for russian companies mail ru and yandex are now available in russian.
You might not want to do that.
Can I see your passport?
What time did you go to bed last night?
Whether he comes or not, I'll go.
The conference will end tomorrow.
mardi mardicienta es displays gratitude towards chavez.
guyana whine fest global voices.
malek says she s encountered many refugees who had varying degrees of understanding as to what awaited them in europe and in many cases they didn t realize that europeans had gone through similar experiences.
Do you have a driver's license?
from algeria the moor next door explores some of the reasons that may have contributed to algeria s refusal to recognise kosovo.
After you.
When did you begin learning German?
She is learning how to drive a car.
Everyone wants to meet you. You're famous!
gv how do you see the future of the university of tolima and public university education in colombia.
the article is titled one of the main candidates in the french presidential elections in algeria described colonization as a crime against humanity the article focuses on the criticism macron received for his statement from other french politicians.
activists attempt to stop the blasting of coastline in jeju by national campaign to end the korean war on facebook.
many twitter users also expressed doubts about the official explanation.
odee com has the story and pictures of this tri national endeavor.
Tom isn't Mary's friend.
This is my brother.
i use the metro daily because i am convinced that it is the best system of transportation that man has created it is in theory fast efficient and inexpensive however in this city it is inexpensive but not fast nor efficient.
the previous government built two new villages in waingmaw township east of myitkyina for those people who were relocated from over villages they had no choice but to start new yet difficult lives with the small houses given by the government and without proper compensation in some cases locals were even coerced by authorities to move.
It's up to you.
He disregarded my advice.
the egypt independent reported that egypt may begin charging those accused of harming national unity under new terrorism statutes article of the draft terrorism law would ban promoting terrorist ideas through media including websites article would classify hackers who attack official government websites as terrorists.
He was stupid enough to believe what she said.
This movie is just great.
how to bypass the egyptian government s internet surveillance program global voices.
macedonia nude art twitter calendar for charity global voices.
caeo for those outside the field they typically think it s pretty unusual to see a black police officer i ve been asked many times if i m originally from spain i can understand this question from people outside the force because they just don t know the many requirements it takes to become a police officer however when i get this question from people within my profession it hits me harder.
the southern cone bolivia and mexico.
venezuela blocks bitcoin sites in crusade against foreign currency.
Let's get ready to go.
I can't tell her now. It's not that simple anymore.
myanmar citizen journalism global voices.
I don't care.
what led to these alliances.
Tom was hit by a truck and died instantly.
a member of iran s judicial inquiry and review commission abbas palizdar created a scandal this month by accusing several top clerics and influential members of the islamic republic of corruption in a speech a booali university in hamadan.
kheng info is a useful portal to learn khmer the official language of cambodia aside from word translation the website also offers an audio recording of khmer words which is helpful to understand the meaning of the khmer script check out how the word love translates to khmer.
boubled chez nous sidibouzid c est chaque jour et partout dans chaque recoin d algerie.
It is impossible to live without water.
jordan mixed signals global voices.
i am shuhrat tajiks come to jailed lawyer s defence on facebook global voices.
He is a genius.
palestine.
ha and finally would you have a word for the global voices community.
syrian razan saffour tweets.
algerian the moor next door writes about abbass ould braham a university of nouakchott professor and writer for taqadoumy the leftist mauritanian news website often cited here who was arrested this monday after writing a lengthly piece accosting the junta.
Is everything all right?
step tweet in your mother language.
on july pedro astete director of national archaeological park of machu picchu reported the finding of two new rock paintings close to the ruins of the most famous inca city in the world.
Tourists have increased in number.
Most Americans like hamburgers.
you may also want to use duckduckgo an alternative search engine that unlike google does not record user information.
egypt informer kills officer global voices.
amina a year old girl from larache in northern morocco who was forced to marry her rapist chose to put an end to her life by swallowing rat poison last saturday according to al masa a ar amina was raped by a man ten years older than her when she was barely and to preserve what is called family honour amina s marriage to her rapist was arranged a judge approved the marriage.
supporters of francois hollande gathered at solferino street before joining at the bastille in case of a victory.
we complained constantly about all the friends we left on the other side whom we can no longer see with every battle a new extremist or a spiteful man wanted to rule us with his gun we had to bear the feelings of neediness sadness and accumulated memories aleppo was changing and we were changing with it.
video decoding indian headshakes in less than two minutes global voices.
Tom is in his room sleeping.
I can't remember his name.
afghanistan has witnessed a boom in meat production in last decade many afghans depend on meat producing businesses to earn a living photo by aaquib khan.
the message arrived at pm on july.
There's no one home.
Many tourists visit Kyoto in the spring.
the blogger also says a million award by fbi for killing or capturing mughnieh shows the fear of terrorist states from anybody who wants to resist in reality the award was million.
zeljko mitrovic the owner of pink tv is one of the most influental serbs who had initially condemned jolie because of her anti serbian prejudices and had even withdrawn from the movie project now however he has changed his mind.
I have lunch at noon with my friends.
this article and radio report by joyce hackel and julia barton for the world originally appeared on pri org on october and is republished here as part of a content sharing agreement.
Please make the bed.
I knew it was you.
madrid june photo by and courtesy of cristina mari cristinagayart.
Somebody is eating.
brazilian activist nayana fernandez interviewed some of the former dwellers of the indigenous settlement known as maracana village in rio de janeiro days before they were violently evicted by the state government.
it is a deja vu of the steve seungjun yoo incident that happened in steve yoo was an extremely popular singer who was once loved by korean people as a sincere healthy minded star involving himself in good deeds and behaving unlike those typical rock stars when it became impossible to evade the duty any further yoo broke his verbal promise he made over the television that he would fulfill his military duty and instead became a naturalized us citizen the korean public was very shocked at the discontinuity of his action the south korean government took it as a serious crime of desertion deporting him to the us and banning him from entering korea permanently.
india india and the us global voices.
reactions to the campaign in social media have in large part been very positive john f nebel writes in his blog metronaut de.
This will cost 30.
the new zealand high court ruled that the search of kim dotcom s residence was illegal and based on an invalid warrant dotcom is the founder of file sharing website megaupload which was shut by the us department of justice in january for copyright infringement.
I saw you driving your new car.
caijing commentator ye tan called on zh the hunan government to be more transparent about the food safety issues however as it shows on the shared map of china s rice pollution the problem is not only limited to hunan but found in china at large.
I remember seeing him somewhere before.
Food is necessary for life.
My mother left me a message.
mokhtasatehonar says fa with irony that.
so the idea is to highlight the problems we all share and to try and get africans to understand more and to come and share and communicate their issues in their respective countries in india for example it is one country and their are institutions where this information can go as you know in africa there is none and there is no place for someone to just share their story and get heard.
I'm in love with you and I want to marry you.
the state run syrian news agency sana released an immediate statement saying syrian authorities are offering sincere condolences to the families of the deceased and the turkish people.
andaluss from morocco notes.
all links lead to french language web pages.
at global voices some of us live and work in over countries around the world.
Sorry, but I can't hear you very well.
australia will not take part in a controversial united nations anti racism conference in geneva this week.
I'm really glad to hear that.
algeria a sit in for reporter khaled sid mohand detained in syria global voices.
Spanish is spoken in twenty countries.
That is his car.
popular writers who release their works on the china literature platform must sign contracts with the company stipulating copyright ownership in china literature s favor and listing a set of self censorship guidelines that must be followed.
egypt facebook politics and journalism global voices.
the just unveiled plan to reshuffle state council agencies may not be as broad or thorough as some anticipated but even with some apparently interim arrangements it is a welcome move.
Stop hitting your brother.
He got the ball.
The house is said to be haunted.
a mural of kiwxi an indigenous leader assassinated in brazil and whose image adorns the inside wall of the churuata photo by akaneto.
I'm crazy about you.
I'm left-handed.
I'm very glad I wasn't there.
architect and researcher omnia khalil has published this presentation as a part of egyptian urban action ar an exhibition and workshop scheduled for july it concerns advocating for the residents of informal neighbourhoods and highlights urban deterioration forced evacuation and urban challenges in egypt in this video ar we hear from some of the people facing forced evacuation the workshop also aims to amplify their voices so they can participate in policy making.
A girl phoned me.
shiva nazar ahari a blogger and human rights activist was sent to prison to serve a four year sentence in september she had been charged with attempts to deface the islamic government assembly with intention of conspiring against the islamic government and disrupting the public order in september.
i travel to live dream feel and discover different worlds every trip is an adventure and with it a new responsibility knowledge happy.
egypt km human chain protest outside nile university global voices.
You look like you've been doing something you shouldn't.
we speak with five global voices contributors who recall a moment in which they felt connected to someone across borders and across language veroniki krikoni talks about the similarities between greek and turkish tori egherman explains how a hiking trip cemented her affection for iranian culture violeta camarasa remembers how a love of music overcame a lack of a shared language while traveling in rural china adriana macias speaks about her time working with people from around the world in london and joey ayoub looks back on his experience living in a small village in madagascar.
the book market in kyrgyzstan is weak and stories like square country vie for room on the shelves of bishkek s bookstores with russian children s stories and western translations of popular tales her competitors are supported by substantial publishing machines.
What shall I do with the knife?
photos picnicking under japan s cherry blossoms global voices.
and just like spring autumn ends all too fast the bright sunny days of october and early november are soon replaced by the winter rains that wash the colorful hues of fall away.
The earth is round.
We have to do this by ourselves.
eric gordy of east ethnia discusses a recent report on media ownership in serbia.
You haven't eaten anything.
The judge's decision is final.
He entered the room after you left.
When are you going to quit smoking?
Put the gun on the table.
I know nothing yet.
russia crowdmapping corruption with bribr mobile app global voices.
she continued.
Is there a cash machine near here?
over the next days and weeks we ll be fleshing out the program adding speaker bios a list of attendees and more and do keep checking in at the site for blog posts and commentary from summit participants and others as well as to join in the conversation.
finally two years after copenhagen the world passed an important milestone human population reached billion the sheer complexity of ensuring all are fed have decent lives and opportunities and are lifted out of poverty increases as our numbers increase many scientists argue it is perfectly possible to achieve these goals without breaking through climate thresholds but it will be tough.
Practice makes perfect.
That doesn't seem right at all.
personally i find that a little difficult to swallow if singapore is not a country but a city then which country is our city part of.
Would you mind standing aside?
Bees fly from flower to flower.
Take advantage of every opportunity.
Call me tomorrow.
from the march org site.
russia rooftop krasnoyarsk pictures global voices.
He built a fence around his house.
the whole initiative is taking full advantage of online tools and social media to push to remove barriers to industrial hemp farming in the u s through education legislation and advocacy only states have passed pro hemp farming legislation so far hemp history week is asking supporters to sign and send postcards urging president obama and attorney general holder to change federal policy and supporters are so far planing to host nearly local events nationwide.
Show me another example.
three and a half months after iber was blocked by the press and publication department and after the case iber filed to challenge the blocking decision was dismissed by the higher court of justice iber took the opportunity of blog action day to answer the question they often hear why don t you just get licensed.
tuition fees have skyrocketed in recent years but those who manage to pay aren t guaranteed a decent living at the end of the academic road graduates who global voices spoke with complained that while at university they had to navigate politics and confusing government job advice and afterward they have found themselves stuck with menial and underpaid work or no work at all.
every human community whether a small settlement or a massive metropolis has a water management system with three facets water sources which lead into water supply systems and end in water sanitation.
I'm just a tourist.
this video posted by mgan puts together a minute footage of the bedoon protest.
Where's Tom?
Never say never.
on monday we kicked off a fresh wave of celebrations with a special edition of gv face featuring our co founders rebecca and ethan but global voices community members all over the world have been hosting gv birthday events for the past few weeks and there ll be several more in the days to come and even more at our sixth summit which takes place in cebu city philippines on january join us.
while the tokugawa clan was famous for their military prowess their aesthetic sense was not as highly developed leaving visitors to nikko overloaded with the visual stimuli of temples coated in gold and vermilion hues.
china activist s wife and son harassed online global voices advox.
for all the years that a national internet project has been discussed iranian media agreed on at least one thing there is a cloud of ambiguity over project.
He came in person.
You can't run my life.
the majority of patients no longer plan to return to their families but entrust their fate to god.
in this edition we have company in the voice of co host yazan badran a global voices author from syria based in japan the topic this month is global social media campaigns the good the bad and the ugly.
The police arrested the man who had murdered the girl.
de que se le acusa al alcalde de espinar.
I was bothered by the baby's crying.
doubting the effectiveness and the outcome of the latest arab initiative bilad el sham predicts that it will not be successful and that it will end up a failure just like its predecessors.
Please lock the door when you leave.
Did he come by bus or by train?
i was born in nice france where my parents worked for a couple of years before going back to madagascar i learnt to walk with my grandpa in the arenes de cimiez a park located on the hill side of the city and i was with him in the park as a three year old when he first had the first of the strokes that would take his life a few years later.
We have to do the shopping.
zouhair yahyaoui was one of these educated young tunisians who were violently and painfully subjected to the consequences of the ben ali dictatorship once they became adults he wanted to take his freedom without waiting for the right moment through his webiste and forums he had tirelessly denouncing human rights violations unfair trials and he had been showing support to the opponents of the regime.
global voices gets redesigned welcome back global voices.
taiwan reflection on japan earthquake global voices.
this post is part of our special coverage syria protests.
egypt tahrir square burning global voices.
I learned to live without her.
almost as a sort of response writer ran yunfei wrote zh shortly after that.
throughout the months of november and december we are organizing six global in person meetups led and facilitated by global voices members who live and know those local communities.
the story was one of the first and biggest revelations made by activist alexey navalny about the vast personal wealth of individuals in vladimir putin s inner circle navalny has continued to publish similar investigations for the past year.
Tom lost his sense of smell.
immigrants comprise percent of america s total physicians and surgeons many have come here from countries like mexico pakistan egypt iran and syria to fulfill the universal hippocratic oath.
The king abused his power.
Do you really want Tom to do that?
She's not young, is she?
This car is like new.
My father is oblivious to the emotional pain his abuse caused me.
The door remained closed all day.
Any child knows it.
There's no reason Tom would say something like that.
Please don't talk about me when I'm gone.
when you live in the middle east water is essential to your daily survival israeli kitchen recommends ways to store water in preparation for an emergency and what water sources you can use if your standard stores dry up.
still some south korean politicians keep bring up the potential link between syrian refugees and terrorism says chung shin young at advocates for public interest law in seoul a firm that helps asylum seekers.
I should have done this years ago.
rising voices rising voices microgrant update.
Your plan sounds great.
while its headquarters are based in rio de janeiro the station s scope is brazilian wide in this youtube video for instance radio yande interviews a healer from the dessana tribe in the northern city of manaus getting his insights on the indigenous perspectives of religion the differences between traditional medicine and modern medical practices and the important role the younger generation plays in the protection of indigenous culture.
How did Tom know where Mary was?
not to mention i m global voices news editor and therefore should reasonably keep a finger on the pulse of american politics if only to be better at my job.
She filled her bag with apples.
india pakistan let people meet global voices.
several social movements have demonstrated against pt the flagrant disrespect for fundamental human rights motivated by what some describe as institutional racism pt.
He is always laughing.
in a broadcast society there were gatekeepers the editors and they controlled the flows of information along came the internet and it swept them out of the way and it allowed all of us to connect together and it was awesome but that s not actually what s happening right now.
the blogger says it was a conspiracy between western and zionist intelligence services to kill mughniyeh in order to drive lebanon into another war.
this is not just a culture of extravagance if we don t have political reform the country will be doomed to failure when export collapses consumption shrinks the disparity between rich and poor further deteriorates the more government invests will result in more corruption and deficiency when the ussr collapsed the government investment was of the gdp.
germany.
khatami answered questions from the internet including from bloggers facebook members and twitter he answered questions on different topics such as the election foreign policy and the internet khatami also said he spends at least one hour a day reading blogs and websites he also said that although he is not a blogger himself he loves blogs.
jassimalsaady iraq feb maliki regime follow exact same steps as other ex dictators did they all went to same school.
Tom ordered something to eat.
Innocence is a beautiful thing.
world social forum tunis march.
and this last video from the noida public school in delhi brings us a male perspective of growing up in india focusing on how teen smoking could be brought on by problems at home and peer pressure.
a new report from the university of toronto s citizen lab looks at the use of hacking team s remote control system rcs by the government of saudi arabia as part of a broader campaign of information control.
the charts above show that calculating copyright term is complicated for example afghan girl by steve mccurry was taken in and published in national geographic in the photo has been in the pubic domain in libya since in saudi since in yemen since and remains protected by copyright in all countries where the term is linked to the lifetime of the author because steve mccurry is still alive.
a calendar of human history according to uruguayan writer eduardo galeano global voices.
sonoramica is a sound panorama that records something more complete than the landscape a country its poetry its sounds and its time highlighted to confirm that being diverse we have a shared memory made of images that have sound.
this action was later joined by the armenian collective of buenos aires for the murder of the armenian population in the provinces of trebizonda erzerum bitlis diarbekir jarput and sivas which according to the historic estimations cost million armenians their lives in the first genocide of the th century.
He forgot to turn off the light.
qatar salaries and cars global voices.
alert ali abdulemam goes missing in bahrain.
I'll go if Tom goes.
you can t love what you don t know is the premise of tongues hearts an animated project aimed at preserving and sharing the indigenous languages of mexico.
why do mexicans eat spicy food.
afghanistan from life of fear to life of freedom global voices.
amnesty international has called on iran to release prisoner of conscience zhila bani yaghoub the editor of the website focus on iranian women sentenced to year in jail on september bani yaghoub was also banned from media and journalism for years.
in indonesia bartering and selling takes place in the floating market of lok ba intan in south borneo.
sidibouzid tunisie tunisia.
This knife is very sharp.
The speech lasted thirty minutes.
for the first time ever in egyptian history most egyptian university faculty members went on strike as a first step towards forcing the government to improve their living conditions and the conditions of higher education in the country writes eman from egypt.
He took part in the race.
pokemon go has become a worldwide phenomenon with over million downloads since its release on july in selected countries.
What's your real purpose?
Thanks a lot. I appreciate that.
I'll teach you how to drive a car.
reuters election report phantom voters smuggled ballots hint at foul play in russian vote describes numerous irregularities including stuffed ballots people voting more than once and even a complaint that one reporter s hand held mechanical counter was really an object of radioactive nature.
it s been a year since the first palestinian refugees were allowed to return to the nahr al bared camp in lebanon palestinian haitham sabbah has an update and videos in this post.
What did you talk about?
Above all, watch your diet.
revolutionary socialists movement commented on the low media coverage to the protests.
in the months leading up to the elections much anticipation circulated among iranians and supporters of women s greater political participation about the prospect of getting more women into iranian politics the local elections presented an opportunity to put more women in decision making roles paving the way for women to have a direct say in the laws and policies impacting them their families and communities.
It feels like a dream.
mozambique taxi bicycles prevail in quelimane photo by antonio silva in sapo public domain.
evidently fighting and surviving ebola will take a tremendous deal of collective effort in the affected countries especially considering the stigma inside and outside their borders in the context of this epidemic it has never been more crucial for the communities to realize that they need to get organized together in this struggle or they will perish together as fools.
an egyptian user called no to backwardness and extremism wrote ar he was against abusing religion in the name of politics.
rv during your work in nwf what are the projects you took part in and left unforgettable impression on you.
it also seems clear to me that to the world my people s deaths in beirut do not matter as much as my other people s deaths in paris.
digital citizen contributor katherine maher shares a few words about imprisoned egyptian blogger alaa abd el fattah.
afghanistan afghan police in nawa and parkour global voices.
I've gone to Kyoto twice.
We were all present at her wedding.
this russian website uses neural networks to combine images with awesome results global voices.
Let us know if you don't understand something.
She provided me with some food.
She caught my eye.
Bring it back to me.
alfonso baella alfonsobaella holds that.
Why is Tom even here?
however a few days later this tweet was deleted and a new one appeared.
mexico discriminatory tendencies of mexico city youth global voices.
pakistan showtime in india global voices.
juan diego zacarias diegozac in turn echoes the theme repeated by the people of espinar.
She chose the red dress.
iran who steals bronze statues global voices.
storymaker has just been launched but that does not mean that there is no room for improvement on the contrary we need our users to continue to improve the app please send us your feedback innovative ideas errors you have come across in the current version etc help us to make storymaker a true success there is an award of for the best idea email us at support at storymaker cc.
from april to april of approximately armenian ruling classes of constantinople were detained deported to anatolia and assassinated following this the order for deportation from civil towns from the war zones in the caucasus to reinstallation centers in the deserts of syria and mesopotamia was passed.
I live in Japan.
anything to prop up the country s economy.
Did you know my father?
towering off to the left you see the transamerica pyramid when she saw it caron thought you know what i m gonna rival that i m gonna put a plant there.
radio yande combines a strong sense of community with digital media to bring brazil s indigenous cultures and languages to the forefront.
every morning at am patients many of whom are quite frail say prayers at the center s chapel photo and caption by pyay kyaw the irrawaddy.
young german olympiad competitors from all over the world arrived at frankfurt airport on august they had made their way from afghanistan new zealand cameroon china romania iran and many other countries in order to put their german knowledge to the test over the following two weeks in the goethe institut s german olympiad.
I'm home.
I love this picture.
russian politician wants journalists prosecuted for sharing footage of his ricky martin dance global voices.
syria new aggregator launched global voices.
This book is unique in many ways.
pic twitter com meu s aog.
Our success was due to his efforts.
laddh lawyer ikken sofiane told algerian news site el watan that touati was charged under article of the penal code which prescribes a punishment of up to years in jail for anyone convicted of exchanging with agents of a foreign power intelligence which could harm the military or diplomatic status of algeria or its vital economic interests.
bouazizi s desperate act of self immolation brought change to tunisia but will amina s suicide bring change to the male dominated culture in morocco and in the arab region.
in april human rights watch described lawlessness in the country international crisis group criticized a campaign of intimidation leading up the referendum including arrests and even deaths of those accused of opposing the referendum officials reject this as mendacious to tarnish burundi s image.
I like him very much.
one of the bedoon protesters getting arrested posted by mohd alsalem.
Can I speak to the doctor?
You should have done so.
What are you going to do?
zaruhi petrosyan a young mother who was beaten to death last year by her husband and mother in law image courtesy of family via news am.
iraqi bloggers losing hope global voices.
several bloggers published a photo where a woman pushed to the ground by the security forces in a book fair gargagarga writes it happens in book fair and everybody is watching it seems people get used to seeing such scenes.
I will make her happy.
indonesians pray for the palestinians who were killed in the airstrikes launched by israel photo by abdullah arief siregar copyright demotix.
Speaking English isn't easy.
iraq baghdad round up global voices.
egypt i unfollowed ghonim because global voices.
why don t you shut up.
abeer almutairi expressed concern that saudis will eventually be left with one texting option smsing.
india growth of online shopping global voices.
all things pakistan on the developments on the political front as an ex primeminister in exile returns to pakistan in early september.
bill gates handshake irks south koreans global voices.
Do you like to run?
He told me not to drive too fast.
Correct me if I am wrong.
Sit down, please.
Well, let's go.
words like woman grandmothers people workers proletariat anti capitalism anti fascism independence were mostly cheered on but when it came time for the word migrants we found ourselves alone megaphone in hand we mustered all our breath in order to raise the tone but of the five senses that every human being possesses the only ones that responded to that word at that moment were ears and a few big astonished eyes it seemed like that term was unknown or better yet that those present were not prepared to include even symbolically it in this group.
al saegh has been harassed detained and prevented from traveling by the bahraini authorities because of her peaceful and legitimate human rights activities in the past when she returned to bahrain after speaking about human rights violations in her country at the th session of the united nations human rights council in geneva last march she was subjected to a five hour interrogation at the airport and then had her passport confiscated.
for more reactions on ghazzawi s arrest please check the hash tag freerazan on twitter a facebook page calling for her release is also up ar.
iran new experience new photos global voices.
Where is his family?
as many in bulgaria fear that there are fewer people reading books now than in the past ognyan antov of anapest offers bg three answers to the question why should we read books because thus we absorb the language and its grammar and spelling this way we come to know world because thereby we feel like one society.
Don't worry about things that aren't important.
trinidad tobago voting process global voices.
This pigeon flew from San Francisco to New York.
avoid mycetism mushroom pickers global voices.
cambodia also suffered from a flooding disaster which was reported to be the worst in a decade triple j mornings reported on facebook the presence of crocodiles in some of the flooded streets.
We have very little time, so listen carefully.
g hertz microprocessor.
You are very brave.
the policy has its limitations of course rather than fully banning cars throughout the entire city only private cars are forbidden to enter the first ring road taxis buses bikes scooters and special purpose vehicles or vehicles with greater than seats that are more than full are allowed to travel anywhere in the city.
science fiction in china global voices.
the list was introduced following the passage of a federal law that requires websites to store all russian users metadata information about the arrival transmission delivery and processing of voice data written text images sounds or other kinds of action and make it accessible to the russian authorities websites can avoid the hassle of setting aside this information by granting russian officials unfettered constant access to their entire data stream.
Will you be home for dinner?
Let's play cards.
capitaine sanogo is the leader of the new national committee for the restoration of democracy and state cnrdr who say they will pilot the transition until the elections in april.
the most noteworthy vending machine of all was one that sold space food.
vanilla bean in madagscar by david darricau on flickr cc license nc by.
insane is how marzouq over zdistrict describes the weather he further explains.
The climate of England is milder than that of Scotland.
We are all convinced of his innocence.
another media activist recorded video of qatifaan after he was killed the footage was posted on youtube by syriandaysofrage graphic video.
I need to get a stamp.
collecting guava from orchards vimruli jhalokathi bangladesh md moyazzem mostakim used with permission.
I like to study languages.
He extorted a large amount of money from her.
You bought the food, so if I buy the wine that will even things up.
lian yue an ex teacher and ex procurator and now a famous blogger and political commentator in china announced on his blog that he is starting a novel entitled on twitter this month according to the blog the novel will last until.
I wonder where I put my glasses.
He will arrive in Paris tomorrow.
a recent report by the gulf centre for human rights gchr entitled mapping cybercrime laws and violations of digital rights in the gulf and neighbouring countries illustrates how this combination of technical and legal measures has led to a new era of repression in the region.
I heard a crash at about ten o'clock last night.
the change the lives the martyrs on this day and others throughout the year of revolution readily sacrificed for has not been achieved and justice has not been served and this governmental gesture albeit a year later certainly is not the solution yemenis were looking for.
the autumn months of october and november bring on quite a spectrum of colors as the leaves on the trees lose their green many people upload their snapshots of the fall foliage to social media.
court convictions in support of crackdown.
today i feel the very same way i feel i have been treated unjustly i feel robbed and i call on the judicial authorities in tunisia to initiate an investigation and find answers to the following question why were the location change requests denied on what basis were tunisian citizens forfeited their right to vote.
agriculture distribution.
yet the power of engaging in deep conversations reading good literature swimming observing nature s beauty like his fascination with dragonflies and acting in theatre performances are all expressions that give his life meaning and make him feel defined don t forget to enjoy your day al halabi told syriauntold that s more important than this article anyway.
It was difficult to remove the coffee stain.
I wasn't busy yesterday.
Tom wants to eat here tonight.
Boys will be boys.
iran a music video about ahmadinejad global voices.
then participate in blogaction by registering your own blog write in any language from any country also remember that a blog is a wide definition vlogs podcasts photos design and social media sites all count on twitter keep an eye on the hashtags blogaction inequality and oct.
I listen to the radio every night.
syria coup plot crushed global voices.
I have to go to the hospital.
ever felt like adding some van gogh style swirls to your photos now you can a russian project called ostagram allows internet users to combine photos and works of art to create fantastical images that wouldn t be out of place in the world of alice in wonderland or in a sci fi space opera.
christopher hill is a young man living with cerebral palsy and through the video one switch one head the world produced directed and edited by himself he explains how he uses one button to connect to the world through his computer via engadget.
uae.
sanaayoussef i have been arrested.
Where're you going?
you can listen to all the songs here.
Be creative.
They forced her to confess.
The girl is lonely.
twitter has suspended more than million accounts for terrorist content.
We want something new.
Do you object to smoking?
I'm 19.
I don't like what's going on.
TV plays an important part in everyday life.
I agree with you that the actor is very talented.
these six meetups are part of a pilot project to explore ways that our vast global voices community in all corners of the world can help facilitate peer learning and exchange among readers and other individuals and organizations in the field of citizen media we hope to build upon this experience for more meetups in.
myrto orfanoudaki simic collected videos of june police brutality meanwhile users liked the facebook page of the athens indignants while users have liked the thessaloniki indignants facebook profile dozens of photographers have been posting greek protest photoreportage work on demotix since early while thousands of photos and dozens of videos by activists and citizen journalists have been posted on the blog of the multimedia team of the athens indignants in syntagma square under a creative commons license since these protests began.
Be vigilant.
do you want us to fact check something a politician or other public figure has said about public finances fill this form or reach out to us on any of the contacts below and we ll help ensure you re not getting bamboozled.
given the context and the background the prognosis for freedom of speech and access of information in the country looks grim many venezuelans are wondering which media space or communication tool will be censored next and what they can do to outsmart the government s efforts.
nevertheless bolivia s government insists on the benefits of a road that would link the central zone of the country beginning from where most illegal coca is produced and where evo morales garners grassroots support coca grower organizations are openly supporting the road as it may provide opportunities to expand production into the tipnis national park inevitably this generates further suspicion among environmentalists international organizations and public opinion.
cont this is the countryside and there are many elderly people video is important because radio and newspapers are not sufficient for those with bad eyesight or hearing the emergency bulletin boards and emergency dialing systems are pretty complex to the elderly of course we didn t have connection to those at that time anyway.
She calls him every night and talks for at least an hour.
No one believed his story.
Why are you doing this?
Speak louder, please.
bamboo trees are not useful to urban residents but to people like mung ra who live alongside the myitsone confluence of the mali and n mai rivers which forms the irrawaddy river miles north of the kachin state capital myitkyina bamboo is a crucial source of income.
Nearly a thousand people participated in the demonstration.
egyptian blogger eman discusses the difficulties of getting a schengen european union visa in this post.
pr for charities and ngos.
oman two new blogs global voices.
the uae s telecommunications regulatory authority tra published white papers on the use of a number of social media platforms including facebook twitter youtube and linkedin these awareness documents as described by tra are designed specifically to highlight the terms and conditions of the most popular social networks in use in the united arab emirates.
what happens when you ask your resident ankle biters to help with washing their shoes the way they hung up the shoes is approaching a work of art and has kept me laughing all morning an early morning offer to the birds.
Go to work.
because he was aware of the little devotion that peru showed bolivar in peru venezuelan ramon urdaneta researched different sources and published interesting data in his blog.
amnesty thoroughly discusses the state of human rights in post revolutionary tunisia.
the vision of the project is to preserve the malian cultural heritage to create a point of reference for young generations and to make this heritage accessible to all people around the world through a blog and social networks.
A glass of water, please.
I am four months pregnant.
from our experience reporting on human rights abuses on a daily basis the crimes which remain unaccounted for are the most likely to continue being repeated impunity gives oppressive governments a carte blanche to silence opposition to their policies as we have witnessed in the case of syria and other repressive regimes that is why it is crucial that netizens worldwide stand up to demand protection of online rights and freedoms.
iran diplomats walk out at ahmadinejad s speech global voices.
postales para memoria is a project run by volunteers hashtag says they re killing us used with permission.
Her feeling for him was reciprocated.
oakland california.
Stop hitting the cat!
tommy edison usually goes to the movie theater for the films he reviews but he also watches dvds at home however setting up a dvd player that was sold to him as accessible proves to be a bit more complicated than he thought although the dvd player instructions come in a multiplicity of languages they don t include braille so learning to use his new equipment is more than a bit challenging.
What does it contain?
as the attack was going on i started shouting at them swearing and threatening that i would call the police the gang answered by approaching me shouting abuse like you traitor leave the country and communist we will stab you.
May I ask where are you going?
Do you mind if I go?
I want more.
artem kozlyuk head of roskomsvoboda spoke to runet echo about the implications of wechat being blocked in russia.
donate now.
in doha ammar mohammed listed qatar s achievements in hosting sporting activities.
what drivers talk about.
You don't necessarily have to go to the airport to reconfirm your plane reservation.
verification handbook.
cameroon un drinking water data under question global voices.
Taking care of the baby is my job.
gunther schulze professor of economics at the university of freiburg germany adds another perspective on the world bank blog.
at the same time the payment system does not encourage good quality work because writers tend to churn out large number of words in order to increase their income under the pay for words model hence a typical online novel contains one million chinese characters or more china literature s writers published a staggering billion words in.
asaad abu khalil author of the angry arab blog and a fierce opponent of the syrian revolution linked to hadidi s tweetsand alerted readers to their sectarian quality.
Who is in the house?
egypt men should wear the veil global voices.
You must face the facts.
How did you cook this?
He combined two ideas into one.
You have to forgive me.
then one morning out of the blue she started telling me stories after the first one i had this gut feeling that i had to record it even though i didn t know how i would use it so i covertly took out my camera and started shooting.
What's she doing?
ignoring the warnings of citizens and technologists united states lawmakers are considering two bills the stop online piracy act sopa and the protect ip act pipa that are a real and dangerous threat to the openness of the web everywhere in the world in response the global voices community has decided to join websites such as wikipedia reddit and boingboing in going dark and will black out the global voices advocacy site for hours on january and display a banner on other global voices sites that provides more information about the proposed bills.
as yes there is and it is that we share the same problems.
Don't you get bored when you're alone?
another in italy provoked pangs of hunger.
some readers of her adaption of the famous kyrgyz fairytale bugu ene literally deer mother queried why she did not set the story in the siberian yenisei region which occupies a founding role in national mythology others asked why there was no wedding in the story.
Let's try something.
in tunisia police are obligated to protect journalists not only because they are citizens but also because attacks against journalists are a crime punishable by jail time but when coverage has questioned the conduct of security institutions law enforcement officials and their powerful unions have too often ignored duty and issued direct threats against media workers both online and off.
qatar jeers cheers as country is awarded world cup global voices.
nicolas sarkozy s supporters in paris gathered at la mutualite before moving to the place de la concorde a last minute change had canceled the appointment at place de la concorde here is a picture of the room at la mutualite at pm.
The pond is very deep.
I'm married and I have children.
the submissions are from countries spanning from india kenya to colombia and highlights multiple topics here are a couple of examples.
Sign at the bottom, please.
ahd kadhem from iraq explains the term houmani ar.
It was well worth the cost.
You are not Japanese.
according to the newsletter.
Don't look back.
according to herve chadnes a curator of contemporary art graffiti has much resonance in chile due to the strong protest movements that saw in walls a place to house their complaints.
the gulf center for human rights is asking supporters to tweet in english or arabic calling on authorities in bahrain to.
Do you feel any pain in your stomach?
in the video the unidentified woman says ar she has a message for obama she then switches to english saying.
Don't forget to put a stamp on your letter.
thai netizens stage virtual sit in to protest single gateway proposal.
why don t cubans like russians.
in short the mps are calling for the creation of an orwellian society.
if we don t start documenting languages digitally especially the endangered ones we may lose the colourful diversity of human civilisation languages are a gateway to new worlds and not everything is translatable languages can also be important repositories for indigenous knowledge knowledge that is relevant to modern society it s up to us as speakers of minority languages to decide how long we want to keep our languages alive.
I don't like him because he is sly as a fox.
lc do you know others that are police officers of color.
telling their story.
Wood burns.
It's too hot.
the united states.
Why do you say that?
university students protest on may against media manipulation picture by hector aiza ramirez under demotix copyright.
the world is getting better but not as good as imagined the world is getting worse but far worse than imagined.
I saw you cooking.
additional funding will help us keep actively translating our content into more than languages and add new languages to the mix ensuring that individuals and media professionals around the world have access to the diverse voices coming from citizen media at a time when coverage of international news is under serious threat.
a landfill fire in fada ngourma gourma province burkina faso photo by flickr user lepetitnicolas cc by nc sa.
global voices co founder to head mit s center for civic media global voices.
Do whatever it takes.
the game uses google maps data to superimpose characters from the pokemon series into your geographic surroundings as you walk your smartphone uses gps to track your position in the world and it will know if you get close to one of these characters you can then capture the character on your phone screen train it and then deploy it in the augmented reality battlefield that is pokemon go.
lebanon racism in banks global voices.
Football is my favorite game.
after a certain point that i can t remember my parents decided not to speak to us in english i don t know if it was an agreed upon conscious decision simply that my brothers sisters and i grew up without being able to speak english this provoked taunting from our african descended friends on multiple occasions and made us feel at other times excluded from an ethnicity that was often associated with the ability to speak the language.
according to the city s plans when the woods finally becomes a park it will be surrounded by a fence to prevent entry outside of opening hours and there are plans to attach cameras to the park s street lamps according to the mayor this will help identify the owners of dogs that may defecate in the park.
You're such a cute boy.
mela fatkic expresses gratitude to jolie on the movie s facebook page she writes.
one big indicator of this explosion in online readership has been the market value surge of china literature china s biggest online literature platform and a subsidiary of it giant tencent the company s value skyrocketed in the hong kong stock market after its initial public offering in november.
dil jan has been a bookseller on the streets of kabul for many years she believes that young afghans must read for themselves and for their nation photo by aaquib khan.
How's your brother?
the company claims china s online literature market has become one of the world s four biggest cultural moneymakers after hollywood blockbusters japanese comics and south korean idol tv dramas such rhetoric promotes the business of online literature as a national project that exhibits china s commercial power.
c pollution.
I don't understand this question at all.
We are facing a violent crisis.
Your examination results are excellent.
temple of kotosh image by flickr user madiko cc by.
mm we have indeed two men in the program who were abused as well we had one particular family where all members of the family were hitting each other we cannot address everything there s all sorts of violence you need to focus on something but there are other cases and they should be addressed.
He is capable of teaching both English and French.
what do a billion muslims really think naseem tarawnah from jordan reveals the findings of a new book.
in the footsteps of yemen.
What did you major in at college?
Tell me where to put these books.
while waiting for the proverbial godot yazid relies among other things on the support of the public cyberparc national agency for the promotion and development of tech parks fr located in the new town of sidi abdellah kilometers south of algiers that public organism is proof that the administration here has a real interest in information technology.
I wanted to buy a painting from Tom.
meanwhile in malaysia semua pun ok there seems to be little or no news of the impact of the world s economic downturn like i say malaysia must be full of superheroes helming the economy which is why we are doing fine maybe we can have our supereconomic advisers sent to us to help them solve their problems which in turn will solve ours.
firas atraqchi reports that journalists beaten equipment seized as they filmed protesters on jumhuriya bridge in baghdad feb iraq.
The cough syrup has a licorice flavoring.
urban art festival latidoamericano in downtown lima peru.
I give my pledge that I will quit smoking.
jordanian blogger qwaider posts things bloggers should avoid in this post.
fast growing city of el alto turns thirty global voices.
Mary bought a new dress for the party.
wamda summarizes a report on the digital spring or how mena governments should speak the language of social media.
I think that's what's happening.
Have you finished it?
I like the dog.
mehdi khazali source doostaranedrkhazali blogspot com.
You should have refused his offer.
now by using more sophisticated tools and resources as documented here for example in using blue coat and rcs products in egypt the state no longer depends on the telecom companies to get access to citizens data and communications information.
using an electronic form at the website of cuidemos el voto es.
chinese authorities can t take a joke.
colombian journalist hector abad hectorabadf es is one of many twitter users who are alarmed es by twitter s decision to implement a sort of geolocated censorship as periodismo ciudadano explains es on social networks in colombia and other spanish speaking countries users are quoting and sharing related blog posts by juan luis sanchez es and victor solano es among others.
This house and this land are mine.
antigua daily photo will be publishing one photo per day for one week of lent processions in antigua guatemala.
hackers in arab cities slow internet and girl power in algeria global voices.
image from ostagram ru.
shortly after sata s election as president he was automatically invited to attend a heads of state summit for comesa the common market for east and southern africa as the summit was being held in malawi however where sata s deportation was still pending in the courts the new zambian president declined to attend the summit telling a malawian special envoy.
I don't know whether she will come.
cinema metro in santiago de chile photo taken from the flckr account of santiagonostalgico under creative commons licence cc by nd.
on the left how i hang up towels i don t really care about.
This theory consists of three parts.
Where are you going?
We've just finished breakfast.
mubarak s regime first shut down access to twitter when protests first started on january then facebook on january before turning off the internet on january.
mariana adds that she wanted to train la tercera journalists to work as a team take advantage of their skills and challenge the forms of narrative when online gives you so much opportunities to amaze your crowd.
It's impossible to learn English in a month.
similar reports also came from the state of sergipe according to newspaper tribuna da bahia pt.
i know you are bored from the same story being told over and over by me but this is what the ordinary iraqis go through everyday despite the countless explosions and assassination that s the army and police that should protect us how funny.
Tom opened his refrigerator and looked inside.
iraq.
Where do you work?
I've been thinking of you all day.
Almost no one believed her.
activities carried out throughout the blog carnival will be as follows.
alguada lighthouse.
iran death penalty for blogging global voices.
The truth is I've never even met Tom.
palestine art amongst the ruins global voices.
Have you been to France before?
Here is your key.
iremembersg is part of the singapore memory project a national initiative to collect preserve and provide access to the memories of a nation which rose to become one of the most prosperous cities in the world.
How will we pay our debts now?
russia azerbaijan azerbaijan airlines refuse to check in russian citizen with armenian surname global voices.
innovation a solar energy powered pc made in mali global voices.
amid the exuberance there is apprehension what will happen when the remnants of the us army finally withdraw but young afghans believe their country is gathering strength after decades of weakness and division.
I'm from Bulgaria.
I'm over eighteen.
Small cars are very economical because of their low fuel consumption.
No one came except Mary.
education in palestine global voices.
No one I know likes Tom anymore.
Today, I was done with my homework early.
Where is the laundry?
I've baked a cake for Tom.
What a team!
You have made many mistakes.
Don't worry about it.
redesign in chinese and arabic.
Tom is trying to get a green card.
upload them and tag them with elevenlive as explained in the following video.
another political prisoner who is next.
Tom came on Monday and went back home the following day.
May I use your telephone?
morocco million year old fossils found global voices.
prominent chinese blogger yang hengjun says farewell to gadhafi s rule and the remaining less than autocratic rulers at china media project.
as monteiro says in the documentary above serious projects transform lives and make men work instead of resorting to crime and armed violence in a tedx sudeste pt presentation in monteiro explained that rehabilitation should involve education and opportunities and incentive for pursuing dreams.
I usually do the dishes.
greetings from a hotel in lahore.
Do you speak Latin?
egypt young people global voices.
as this was the first deployment of the app several difficulties had to be addressed including language and a variety of phone models for example the app runs best on android but as there are many phone models problems can occur for the user.
and after the remangate campaign what has been done for the mined territories.
myanmar video of traffic police accepting bribe global voices.
perhaps cooking a meal for new parents volunteering at a local charity donating things you no longer need or use doing something for your neighbors like mowing their lawn cleaning a park or tutoring someone from a disadvantaged background.
freedom house released its annual freedom on the net report which ranks countries around the world in terms of online rights.
participation on twitter.
well i for one ain t buying.
the contest to win space travel was held by kruger cowne s rising star program for to year olds thirty thousand participants from more than countries competed for a spot on an xcor aerospace lynx commercial spacecraft due to lift off in.
british pathe a media company which produced films from until in the united kingdom has uploaded more than historic news clips to its youtube channel its archives also included numerous films that featured countries in the southeast asian region many of these films are valuable resource that could teach us a lot about the region s recent past and even the present below are some of the interesting videos we found in the british pathe collection.
You haven't washed your hands yet, have you?
we designed this pc to help reduce the digital divide but also the expansion of the use of computers in schools limmorgal is a computer adapted to be powered by solar energy and requires low energy consumption watts required.
from the weather we move to a crazy price hike in cinema tickets baid writes about the price hike on cinema tickets from the the country s only operator.
Be tolerant.
cagb this statement came about while trying to elaborate a story in which the main character was supposed to be an idealist the story failed and the statement remained i saved it for me in my heart that s what i am an idealist and i am pleased to be it i don t like the world i was born into and live in which is worse today than when i was born i would like to change it and each day i try with the smallest actions we re in times of revolution of the small things that s why fighting to change an educational institution like the university of tolima deserves all our effort i hope to be an idealist until the end because i am tired of seeing so much conformity nor do i like seeing old refugee fighters in the comfort that is provided by the selfishness of individual well being.
Do you like to travel by yourself?
Who says that?
Are you the person in charge?
on may militants belonging to the maute group reportedly attacked and occupied various buildings in marawi because of the group s alleged connection to isis the philippine president declared martial law in mindanao and ordered the military to arrest maute members and stop the spread of extremism.
algerian algerianna at patriots on fire asks readers to share their views on the true meaning of their country s independence.
There are a lot of children in the park.
What's the secret?
the south korean public s initial response to the news was pure shock son byung gwan sonkiza a reporter from the south korean citizen media site ohmynews tweeted ko.
I miss him.
team trying to rescue the elephants image by abraham banda norman carr safaris.
responding to rudneva s idea shipilov wrote.
but it will never come to that because sina and tencent aren t stupid they may have been playing fast and loose with the real name regulation rules so far but they both understand that complying with regulators is the only way a company can do business in china don t believe me ask google so if you re on weibo expect to see significant changes in the months ahead and maybe don t retweet those coup rumors unless you re interested in getting to know your local state security agents a bit better real name registration hasn t significantly impacted the discourse on chinese microblogs yet but i have the distinct feeling that the music is about to stop.
data from healthgrove also shows that deaths linked to hepatitis b per people in tanzania have decreased by from to an average of a year at deaths per men in the average mortality rate for men was higher than that of women which was per women the reason for this is that hepatitis is complicated by alcohol abuse which is more prevalent in men than women.
You must fulfill your duty.
more background information about wang bingzhang.
It's lunch time.
I like studying languages.
I'm starving!
in the following one in minute a new burst of steam and ash erupt from the volcano causing the person recording the video to comment that he had never seen the volcano erupt with such strength.
Be careful.
He made up his mind to keep his plan secret.
You've put on weight.
the conference aims to enhance communication between iraqi bloggers and to develop their skills in the field of legal protection and to avoid prosecution as well as training workshops are included the art of writing technical workshops networking.
You must be kidding!
as a protest against discriminatory state policies and arbitrary arrests the stateless community in kuwait bedoon decided to light candles in their houses and post pictures of them on twitter the idea was suggested by blogger anthala al bedoon who thought it would be a message to the authorities that the struggle is going on and that their peaceful objections will not end until they get their rights.
lu ra said that she along with her fellow villagers had asked to meet kachin state s chief minister in september to talk about the dam project but he refused their request saying that he had no time.
if we take this poll as any indication fr it seems that a majority of internet users think they are capable of resisting authority it will be interesting to see whether the future will prove them right.
giorgio chiellini image on flickr by user calciostreaming cc by.
Can you prove it?
What's that building?
as delphine nerbollier tells us in her interview fr with shahinaz on the newslab blog shahinaz broke with family tradition and left her native city in and now leads an independent life in cairo at years old she works as an telecommunications engineer with orange a job which for her raises a number of ethical questions orange moved to this country to so they could pay engineers lower salaries and i m against that sort of thing she says but you still have to live don t you unlike the majority of muslim women in egypt shahinaz has never worn a headscarf or veil and has no plans to do so in the future.
kengao says.
syria the changing face of syria global voices.
we urge readers to share this story widely use hashtag freesafy and tweet links to this press release or recent reports by bahrain center for human rights use the campaign image below to highlight his case we thank everyone for their support.
mahmoud saber announced the launch of fat enha forga which is a new idea to share movies and independent video projects on the internet the debut is a video named let s hope.
the awards supported by thomson reuters recognize outstanding web projects initiated by individuals or groups that demonstrate courage energy and resourcefulness in using the internet to promote freedom of expression.
unlike other countries in the region sudan is grossly underreported and this was ever so evident during friday and saturday s street demonstrations the sudanese government keeps a tight grip on local media and bans journalists from reporting on issues of human rights and corruption.
Look at the price.
That's really great!
syria s children are the innocent victims of this war and drawing attention to their plight and trying to help ease their suffering in the least anyone can do.
pakistan killing of ahmadis to be made legal global voices.
i come from a privileged francophone community in lebanon this has meant that i have always seen france as my second home the streets of paris are as familiar to me as the streets of beirut i was just in paris a few days ago.
egypt kudos to al jazeera global voices.
february.
tom gara who usually lives in cairo was in for a rude awakening in abu dhabi where he discovered that flickr was blocked.
i interviewed z via e mail about his caricatures anonymity religion and freedom of expression in tunisia.
mainland chinese state run media has been running editorials and opinion pieces to criticize the umbrella revolution in hong kong with emphasis on the destruction the street occupations have brought to ordinary people.
fortunately in bulgaria the hcv treatment expenses are covered by the national health insurance fund there are also qualified and experienced professionals in this field.
That boy has black hair.
I've always wondered what it'd be like to have siblings.
The earth moves around the sun.
fauna from chinasmack translates a local news story and netizens responses on the escaped tiger rehearsal of chengdu zoo the rehearsal is quite entertaining.
Tom is still in the hospital.
We cannot distinguish her from her younger sister.
bangladesh mexico and syria triumph in the bobs awards global voices.
Tom isn't old enough to understand this.
hussam sara.
You need to wait.
It would seem that the weather is improving.
we construct our social spaces we may choose to follow a user like a page or subscribe to updates from a given topic.
ha what do you think should be done now that you are free what do you think should be done now by ngos and international supporters with regard to the situation in bahrain would you have a word of advice for those international organizations or those individuals who are trying to help.
chilean students marched for education reform on october and kena lorenzini posts numerous pictures of the second day on her personal blog.
on the campaign s website a call to sign a six point declaration ar explains its goals ar.
What is over there?
The experiment was successful.
Tell Tom to pick up the phone.
She turned around and smiled.
He remained single all his life.
afghanistan for afghans the graffiti calls for unity among afghans who are traditionally divided along ethnic and linguistic lines photo by aaquib khan.
I guess I'd better get back to work.
we are continuing to review the problems of accessing several important platforms via cantv many of these problems are occurring in the cdn platforms content distribution networks which load common files more quickly at this time we cannot confirm an intentional block internetve sep.
those of you paying homage niemeyer the guy was simple a word of advice help make the world more just because that s what he would want.
ronaldo monteiro talking to participants of iee photo by danny silva used with permission.
These are my books.
bahrain ranked eighth in the top sin cities worldwide according to blogger mahmood al yousif.
a missing journalist.
We went to the movies last night.
the volunteers are mostly between and years of age zoran stevovski from ohrid macedonia is among the oldest volunteers and recalled for radio sarajevo his experience taking part in the youth work actions organized in the former yugoslavia.
under a new terrorism bill journalists in egypt could face up to two years in jail if they report non government statistics article of the law bans the publication of false news or data about any terrorist operations that contradicts the official statements released by the relevant authorities the bill is set to be approved by president abdel fatah al sisi and has been criticized by rights groups in the country.
those who live in western societies do not understand the importance of being able to criticize the actions of their government this is a right we do not have in our countries.
a dog enjoys the outdoors taking your puppy to a park where cherry blossoms are in bloom will make for great photo ops photo taken april at national show memorial park by flickr user luckyno cc by nc.
meanwhile several iranian bloggers including shiva nazarahari a female blogger and human rights activist have been jailed since the june presidential election.
He is preparing for the test.
while messenger apps can successfully avoid blocking by registering with roskomnadzor for example threema recently became the first foreign app to register with the russian government kozlyuk believes the wechat block bodes ill for users of popular western messaging apps like whatsapp and telegram.
how the tunisian electoral authority robbed me of the right to vote global voices.
My arm still hurts.
Can you swim as fast as he can?
that is why in we are committed to continue to defend your rights as netizens by publishing original reports and a new series of guides covering areas as diverse as circumvention anonymity surveillance privacy citizen journalism visualization online activism and advocacy.
You ought to have come here earlier.
Was it cloudy in Tokyo yesterday?
I wish I knew where he was!
He is French.
This is a dog.
To make matters worse, her husband died.
active voice reports that the one laptop per child project has come to jamaica.
Tom pretended he didn't know what was happening.
we will need everyone s help to make this happen so stay tuned for syriauntold.
Do you speak Swahili?
It's doable, but not easy.
africans what is your story.
the junior high school i went to at age favored returnees so i believed the discrimination would stop but as there was a large group of us junior high ended up being an even crueler place my grade level comprised six classes the returnees were divided among two of the classes while the normal students who had entered the school through a japanese exam were spread among the six half of my class were returnees whom i instantly befriended as we had all experienced similar discrimination in our elementary schools and understood each other s feelings the other students however didn t look kindly on our bonding together nor did they like the fact that we spoke english among ourselves or that our entrance exam was easier the japanese one they were polite to our faces but they gossiped behind our backs and judged everything we did i remember vividly the time the non returnees in our class made a list of all the returnees and ranked us from the most bearable to the worst then showed us the list and laughed at our reactions some people found this so traumatic they erased it from their memories.
Can I wait for Tom here?
these are some of the photographs taken by the students and uploaded to the university s flickr account click on the photograph to visit the original photograph.
She's my sister.
several news sites reported fa that jailed blogger hossein ronaghi maleki s life is in danger his health condition has deteriorated and he has been moved to an isolation cell his kidney is hemorrhaging and security forces have prevented appropriate medical care for him.
Good morning. We have good weather today.
read an interview with rich jones at the newsmeback blog.
ghomar ashegahne has published several photos showing security forces beating protesters see photo above the blogger writes fa that the repression would be a good reason not to go to streets to protest but what can we do with all this sorrow he says karoubi and moussavi the two reformist candidates who wanted to change situation in country should start now.
syria.
I never liked biology.
My father has never been abroad.
syria duhumanizing transexuals global voices.
I think life is what you make it.
I don't care.
in fossil teeth of central american primates appeared as well jonathan bloch leader of the university of florida team that investigated this finding commented.
what happens if i tell you that knowing is not necessarily understanding.
football players protest against the european under championship being held in israel global voices.
media coverage of the disease in tanzania has focused on its emergence as a public health crisis with some publications dubbing it a silent killer due to the fact that it takes five to years for those with hepatitis to develop a chronic illness.
I thought I did pretty well.
I'm not leaving until you tell me what I want to know.
osvaldo bayer recorded their names they were consuelo garcia angela fortunato amalia rodriguez maria juliache and maud foster.
I'm not used to this kind of work.
miss october beckons russia s men in arms source fromsyriawithlove ru.
Our teacher will go to the USA next month.
the life and times of two indians in pakistan explains the perils of being a vegetarian in pakistan.
Someone stole my wallet.
osgaweesh september.
I don't feel safe here anymore.
I am from Columbia.
I want an answer from you ASAP.
maciula tells about terrible situation of coscripts in the turkmen army reportedly they escape from military bases sell their forms and sometimes also guns and then they hide in their relatives homes.
There were no roses in the garden.
sheila coronel director stabile center for investigative journalism professor of professional practice columbia university graduate school of journalism.
what a beautiful thing is the hashtag arepaeltacoestacontigo that the mexicans have created solidarity from intangible flags those of the soul.
global voices podcast more from gv global voices.
Most Americans do not object to my calling them by their first names.
over the past year various princes in brazil s royal family have frequently appeared among the common people in the protests against dilma rousseff posing for pictures with the old imperial flag this approach is different from a past behavior during the june mass protests that brought millions of brazilians into the streets to protest rising bus fares and corruption the official recommendation from the imperial house to its supporters was to stay at home according to bbc brasil monarchists found it necessary to abstain from participation in mass rallies at the time.
andy yee from chinageeks translated chinese activist wen yunchao s open letter to the investors of sina to reduce their shareholding so as to weaken sina s efforts in censorship.
My briefcase is full of papers.
breaking borders award at the gv summit global voices.
omani blogger sleepless in muscat has launched two new blogs.
peace corps volunteer duncan writing about racism in morocco touches on a similar theme he notes that foreign women who look arab are often subject to different treatment than other foreign women.
statue of gaspar yanga photo by erasmo vasquez lendechy via wikipedia used under a creative commons license.
I smell something rotten.
He always tells the truth.
thoughts comments find me here gilgul.
when twitter saves the day global voices.
This pond has a lot of carp.
if le patriote broke the law by pre empting a state entity s prerogative to publish information then it may be punished but not by jailing its editor or the reporter who wrote the story under cote d ivoire s media law journalists cannot be detained for media offences so charles sanga must be released furthermore the dst s attempt to force him to reveal his sources violates a basic principle of media freedom.
despite widespread calls for a greater focus on school security some city private schools insist they have already taken appropriate action to protect their students.
Take me with you.
with china s censorship machine ready to stop any harmony disruption both the english and chinese versions of the new york times website were blocked within hours of the article s publication however chinese netizens know creative ways to jump the great firewall and had already been using the code word sparta which has a similar pronunciation to th congress in chinese in order to access the article lily kuo explores on quartz how chinese netizens got around the censors to read the article and discuss the issue kuo writes.
Maybe you're right.
A good idea occurred to me.
join us in keeping the internet free and open.
She says she will call you later.
all my thoughts are with the victims of the rabaa massacre the smell of death still lingers.
I'm afraid the doctor is out.
cagb even though it was extreme in the sense of putting yourself at risk as a human experience it allowed me to reflect on some things such as human solidarity which has always preoccupied me we get upset about everything but we don t act and then when someone acts we don t show support i found solidarity at the university from many people including some who have a very different way of thinking to suffer from hunger is to feel more human moving closer to the animal condition that precedes us and also to reflect on the meaning of existence because if you don t feed yourself you decompose and that makes you think about life and the meaning of being here.
iranian facebook user sentenced to death global voices.
these examples of contemporary expression defy and contrast with the common idea of art which is usually portrayed as something so valuable that it needs to be protected and kept in a safe place like high security musems and elite galleries with a growing acceptance of community latin american graffiti writers and urban artists take the internet as they take any other public space with the strength of unique voices that reach out to others by any means possible.
The lecture lasted for two hours.
during the soviet era favored writers received comprehensive support from the state that enabled a few writers including kyrgyzstan s most famous literary export chingiz aitmatov to raise their literary profile through the vigorous promotion of communist authorities after gaining prominence in kyrgyzstan and then across the soviet union as a whole his books were translated into dozens of different languages and read across the world.
in december croatia became a free reading zone for all its residents willing to install a special mobile app that provides access to a rich e book library.
The climate here is mild.
as my iphone buzzed on my laptop xinwen lianbo arguably the most watched news show in china was displaying a meticulously drafted government statement read out word by word live to the nation by a chinese state tv anchor it denounced a long awaited international ruling that had just slapped beijing in the face.
Don't waste your time.
southeast asia crocodiles in the news global voices.
Please come in.
He's accustomed to traveling.
My mother made me a bag.
She lost her way.
They decided to get married.
one billion stories is a series of short films set in shanghai about the people we pass by every day in this video the bbq street vendor steven talks about his life as a migrant worker in shanghai his view on freedom and independence and his ideal china he says.
He insulted me without reason.
I'm in the car.
photo sinchen lin flickr cc.
one of the town s plazas shows his statue presenting el yanga as a defiant proud man.
winning an olympic heat for equatorial guinea months after learning how to swim.
Why did you go to Tokyo?
when jeroen koolhaas and dre urhahn started the favela painting project in their idea was to create public artworks in favelas in rio de janeiro eight years later their dream has escalated to paint an entire hillside favela and create a social artwork of epic size.
support is strong for dr akroot according to zeinobia at the egyptian chronicles where the team of doctors are being hailed for their determination to save lives during the crisis and strength to come forth and expose what happened at the al matrya educational hospital.
curiously a photo of aircraft that crashed last week a beechcraft c gt king air prefix pr som saw a spike in internet traffic on jan with clicks this contrasts sharply with the previous days when the same photo was viewed only a handful of times the first observer to notice this was claudio tognolli a reporter with the brazilian service of yahoo.
The hotel at which we stayed was very comfortable.
belarusian citizens are not usually known to enthusiastically heed the commands of their long time president alyaksandr lukashenka in fact his authoritarian monopoly on ruling belarus is frowned upon but as it turns out there are exceptions to every rule.
I like candlelight.
peru.
why do turks drink coffee with water.
I prefer biking.
if you steal do not govern.
That house belongs to me.
I'm not a problem-solver.
Let's get started right away.
I have a dictionary.
Stop yelling!
bangladesh overcrowded trains global voices.
I'm ready for next week.
I am bored.
slow and indirect.
metrobus traveling through mexico city image by j tadeo.
despite scarce media coverage in japan the film has been shared widely on social media.
if you d like to join us in cebu city please register through the summit web site the registration fee is php for residents of the philippines us for residents of south east asia outside of the philippines and us for international participants.
foreign policy magazine middle east editor david kenner visiting the british ww cemetery in gaza and shares this photograph on twitter.
Who are these two boys?
He was so mad that he forgot to eat dinner.
elijah zarwan from egypt reports that the egyptian parliament is threatening to cut ties with the european parliament and the euro mediterranean council if the european parliament passes a resolution criticizing egypt s record on human rights.
source horan rebel painter on facebook.
kim jong il s biggest concern is whether or not his son and soon to be successor kim jung un will maintain a grip on power after he dies i think the chances are bleak if he the successor keeps acting this way the regime will not last two years.
whether it is surkania s byzantine ruins.
thanks to the global voices advocacy community for helping put together the resources available in this post.
He is ill.
Madrid is the capital of Spain.
blogger mohammed al fazari who published articles exposing government corruption was arrested on dec after authorities at muscat international airport informed him of a travel ban imposed on him he was released in the evening of the same day.
They are my brothers.
today as we looked at the world economy moving up and down like a yoyo i cannot help but think had everyone in the world been contented we might not have such extremes the world has been driven by expenditures.
Tom wanted to call the police, but Mary wouldn't let him.
in the year elisa sanchez and marcela gracia got married in the church of saint george in the galician city of a coruna.
u s navy and republic of singapore ships steam through the south china sea in photo public domain from the us navy via wikimedia commons.
throughout the months of november and december global voices is organizing six in person meetups in karachi kampala skopje porto phonm penh and cairo the meetups are led and facilitated by global voices members who live and know those local communities.
six hong kong police officers kick and punch a handcuffed protester in a dark corner global voices.
Tom has always had that problem.
the passage of sopa and pipa by the united states congress and senate would force social media platforms and other web sites that host user generated content to pro actively monitor and censor users to prevent them from posting words or images that may violate copyrights it would raise the cost of participation on these sites for all users worldwide and could force many social media projects to shut down especially smaller websites and businesses.
human rights watch has just released its country reports on saudi arabia writes saudi jeans who goes on to discuss justice and the constitution in his country.
My mom doesn't speak English very well.
Yes, I know.
I believe in God.
with the arrest of touati algeria continues its crackdown on government critics and those peacefully exercising their right to free speech online in december of this campaign cost the life of blogger mohammad tamalt who entered a coma after staging a two month hunger strike in protest of his detainment for publishing on facebook a poem critical of algerian president abdelaziz bouteflika.
iran we do not have homosexuals in iran global voices.
I've got to speak to you.
Can you see the difference?
bloggers informed that masuleh s year old market was burnt in fire the historical city of masuleh has an age of eight hundred to a thousand years.
Go back to your seats.
egypt monopoly on backwardness global voices.
as we sat in a tented school that was being prepared we felt the children s eagerness to resume their educations many had been out of school for the past four years but excitedly recounted what they still remembered.
more than three years ago iranian authorities attempted to use the same method of humiliation against a student activist but failed.
the word graffiti comes from the greek word graphein which means to write modern graffiti was born in the s in new york and was inspired by hip hop music the number of graffiti signatures an artist has depends on the reputation and fame of the artist.
Whoever committed this crime was surely out of his mind.
the cops fear and envy everything.
nikahang a leading cartoonist and blogger has published another cartoon where ali larijani parliament speaker is executing a blogger.
fantastic news that shawkan will soon and finally be free but only because he has already served years in jail the sentence he was handed today he never should have been behind bars he was arrested while doing his job as a photographer egypt https t co ot ht pg.
Would you mind shutting the door?
You are not supposed to smoke here.
looking down the parade route on ladbroke grove sunday august photo by london emigre see his notting hill photoset here.
The door will be painted tomorrow.
caeo with perseverance and effort you can succeed don t let the prejudices get to you at least not before giving the job a fair shot.
Thanks for the advice.
I have a book.
I like sports.
photograph by elena arrontes.
She was accused of telling a lie.
It was very nice seeing you again.
Hurry up, or you will be late.
singapore is it a city or country global voices.
She told me an interesting story.
there is also no hospital or medical center al amal hospital was fully destroyed on april instead some warning link to graphic video showing an injured person undergoing an operation without anesthesia makeshift hospitals rely on trainees to serve patients.
chinese police have caught a gang of traders who bought rat and fox meat and sold it as lamb when the scandal was featured in chinese newspapers and websites it caused outrage among consumers who have been hit by a series of food scandals in recent years tealeafnation has translated zh some online comments from sina weibo.
police arrested touati on january and confiscated his computer and camera according to the algerian league for human rights laddh the group s lawyers are representing touati in court.
in this climate of social tension where the role of independent media is key to dispelling misinformation and communicating the legitimate demands of protesters the tunisian authorities are harassing journalists and drawing criticism from rights groups press freedom advocacy groups including the tunisian journalists union snjt reporters without borders amnesty international and the north african correspondents club have condemned the rise in attacks on journalists by police.
a recent survey of college students es mostly from the rio piedras campus of the university of puerto rico shows that many of them actually use facebook to read news.
Could we have a fork?
I have a pen.
My father was about to leave when the phone rang.
Smile at the camera, please!
image from flickr user pablodf pablo flores cc by nc nd.
the delegates from the countries that participated in the first world humanitarian summit held in istanbul last month could not have been more full of good intentions the summit was an opportunity to highlight the remarkable work done by certain countries including in the area of receiving and integrating refugees which is often ignored in the international mass media uganda was one of the stars of the summit for its achievements when it comes to hosting refugees.
subscribe to the netizen report by email.
china s soldiers have instant noodles cooked with muddy water political performance or not global voices.
the cause started as a result of the presented testimonial in december of by scribe gregorio hairabedian a descendant of assassinated armenians who asked for an investigation to determine the fate of of his direct relatives in the armenian provinces vilayets of paulu and zeitun under the power of the former ottoman empire.
waleed al hussein al dood journalist and founder of the news site al rakoba has been detained for more than a month without charge in a jail in the city of dammam saudi arabia al dood could face deportation to sudan where he is at risk of abuse and arrest by security forces his website which has been blocked by sudanese authorities on several occasions is critical of the government and covers corruption as well as human rights violations.
this thanksgiving my big fat cuban family opted to take a traditional thanksgiving side dish corn and added a cuban spin to it check out the mouth watering recipe here.
If it had not been for your help, my father would have failed.
since prisoners are stigmatized by part of brazilian society several of these problems remain unaddressed investments and improvements are certainly necessary but while high amounts of money are invested crime prevention policies take on a secondary role.
media has not followed up on the aftermath of the detention but youtubers were mostly supportive of the man.
A woman without a man is nothing.
macedonia analyzing skopje global voices.
some people signed a petition on change org asking frankfurt airport customs to release the violin without requiring any payment.
Don't worry about my dog. He won't do you any harm.
Why is it so hot?
It's as lovely as a rose.
asraranwar differences between iraq state tv and other news outlets about iraq protests is really quite funny feb.
someone who listened to it said that this it is the most moving thing he has heard in a long time it is mohammed omer speaking from his hospital bed to nora barrows friedman on flashpoints on pacifica radio she was in palestine recently.
having many similarities may not be enough when there is a difference that is considered greater that is the case of between us two from israel.
May I help you?
I hope that it rains tomorrow.
yemen safe streets campaign first book global voices.
why don t the japanese age.
This is the time he normally arrives.
ossaim ruler of potions and remedies published with permission.
I don't know how to express my thanks.
china the first chinese novel on twitter global voices.
the video shows people dancing joyfully in front of delayed construction works for the fifa world cup watch porto un happy below with captions in english.
worldwide an estimated of people with hepatitis are unaware of their infection hepatitis tests are complex and can be costly with poor laboratory capacity in many countries including tanzania where diagnostic and therapeutic evaluations cost tanzanian shillings us dollars and medical care costs shillings dollars per month during the treatment period.
In Japan a new school year starts in April.
two young gaza bloggers were excited to have the chance to attend their first football match the second match of the tournament lina al sharif who blogs at live from gaza was surprised to be able to go.
Japan and South Korea are neighbors.
syrian activists posted this video on the facebook page of break the siege of homs on june revealing the destruction of the city.
I'm going to stay home tonight.
north mali indirectly in the hands of aqim.
He left the door open.
She might come.
from our partners.
I don't have much desire for wealth.
youngsters surf the internet near the ruined darul aman palace the palace known to have braved many political upheavals in kabul was built in the s only of afghan youths have access to internet with million mobile phone users in the country in technology played a role in connecting youth during last year s presidential elections photo by aaquib khan.
peruvian newspapers reported es on thursday july that humidity in lima reached es lima residents expressed their opinions on twitter using the hashtag humedad humidity.
lebanon once upon a time in beirut global voices.
renewable energy permaculture and green building along with local traditions and eco tourism welcome to tribewanted an online community launched in based on the idea of global citizenship and harnessing the energy of social media to meaningfully connect and practice positive behavior change thanks to crowdfunding strategies the project plans to build eco villages around the world after vorovoro fiji islands and john obey sierra leone a new village just launched in monestevole it in umbria the heart of italy connect with tribewanted people via web facebook or vimeo.
What they told you is not true.
video no woman no drive stuns saudi arabia global voices.
Lock the gate.
Mark Twain said, "All generalizations are false, including this one."
Do you have one?
What do you think?
I'll phone you.
jon williams williamsjon july.
link http bit ly translathon the translation form is closed and will be available just before midnight on august.
lc do you remember the greatest day of your career in the national police tell us about it.
iraq.
He pretended that he was a lawyer.
iranians celebrate norouz nowruz or new year today and president obama has sent a message of peace to iranian people and leaders watch it here.
Country life is very peaceful in comparison with city life.
The horse stopped and wouldn't move.
i ve stumbled onto a new libyan blogger who calls herself enlightened spirit and she and her colleagues at the hospital are doing a great job.
Tom walks slowly.
digital citizen global voices advox.
the year will be the lebanese year for oil and gas exploration according to a timeline which is supposed to be approved by the cabinet and which is posted by the lebanon spring blog.
text and sound by sabine blanc.
maputo mozambique dercio tsandzana.
the facebook page we are all khaled said reports how the egyptian authorities used to keep an eye on all egyptians who were politically active.
Who is it?
Please look at me.
Take a rest.
another suicide bomb attack in pakistan killing people in lahore more at all things pakistan.
i don t have it all figured out i m human rather than convince myself that i have all the answers i reach out i understand that not everyone may have access to the same breadth of resources but if you seek support you can generally find it.
Tom parked the truck in front of Mary's house.
Tom hung his new dartboard on the wall.
You'd better hurry up if you want to get home before dark.
al jazeera journalist dima khatib was similarly dismayed.
There's no shortage of work.
azerbaijan christmas is catching up among the youth in baku though not widely celebrated in azerbaijan aygun janmammadova recommends a filo strudel for mushrooms and cheese lovers and more azerbaijan cuisine is shared on az cookbook.
the capital damascus today joined the protests too with videos showing thousands protesting popping online this video by mohamed k shows syrians protesting outside the zaid and al hassan mosque.
since state media have normalized the practice of social surveillance and watching each others actions while hawking hate speech towards anything different or foreigner has become acceptable new restrictive regulations are constantly being imposed and the sense of surveillance is gradually growing in the background affecting the activism community and those involved in public change and the media ecosystem.
assad and isis via ahmed jalal facebook page used under cc by.
are you the bomb.
fas apart from the newz i maintain a number of other blogs and will admit to being quite the amateur nerd despite my complete lack of technical education i am dogged in my assault on the digital world and see it as offering real hope to those of us whose work and interests are sub the interests of the so called mainstream the web is democratising effective and liberating so yes all our business takes place online and i am all over facebook myspace google groups e commerce cd baby flickr you name it of course none of this is anything a five year old today can t manage but it has changed the way that we can and do communicate for a small business like mine with limited resources it has offered great very tangible opportunities for expansion marketing communication networking.
for more pictures of the g protests see pics at the account of flickr user powless.
another new isn blog partner is project syndicate who will be supplying commentary from high level international scholars and analysts also according to a monthly calendar.
international organizations call for a swift adoption of marco civil in brazil global voices.
egypt hiv in egypt global voices.
and here s the new design and how the homepage can be improved.
Is there an elevator?
Here he comes.
in india there is the i paid a bribe crowdsourcing initiative which was launched in august to encourage people to not put up with official abuse of power and to report their stories of bribery to uncover the market price of corruption gv text is here.
what are the organizations you feel closest to in terms of potentially leading campaigns for your release and or better treatment.
I'm free now.
this article and radio report by producer april peavey for the world originally appeared on pri org on june and is republished here as part of a content sharing agreement.
It's a small world.
Where's the nearest subway station?
What do you suggest that we do now?
with this partnership global voices will enhance its coverage of chilean news from a hyperlocal citizen perspective focused on news outside the capital santiago mi voz has more than citizen journalists reporting for their media outlets from regions across the country founded in mi voz say that they are moved by the goal of generating media where all those different actors shaping the local reality can actively engage on dialogue take action on the issues they care about and open new doors as they push local agendas.
moroccan students call for reform of the education system photo used with kindly permission from hassan ouazzani.
libya in memory of a father in law global voices.
peace lovers also continue to join a facebook page that was launched on march by israeli pushpin mehina also known as ronny that tells iranians israelis love you and will not bomb your country the page currently has more than likes on the same day iranians launched the facebook page from iran for peace and democracy which soon started a campaign to tell israelis we are your friends.
I am in a new house.
We are happy.
tweets you can use click here to find more.
My father gives my mother all of his salary.
She asked me how old I was.
The engine started again.
I love the taste of watermelon.
Do you speak Esperanto?
gerardo arreola a journalist from la jornada in mexico wrote about his efforts es.
These windows are bulletproof.
He lost his job.
a new draft bill lays the groundwork for an autonomous runet image from wikipedia cc by.
another excellent article from the washingtonpost com has pamela windo sharing her experience with hijab in morocco.
pakistan diagnosis from a distance global voices.
it s quite difficult to be in the streets and be focused on both hunting pokemon and on the lookout that gasht ershad don t hunt me life has become hard.
Too much drinking will make you sick.
No one is coming.
atena faraghdani has been freed.
manawer is of pakistani descent but grew up in essex england and after a poem he wrote won him a space flight he received widespread attention when during a speech in thailand he said my name is hussain manawer and i am not a terrorist manawer says he said it in response to the many racial profiling incidences he has experienced.
hello beautiful minds and elegant souls of the world my fellow gvers.
My family lives here.
cuban diaspora bloggers say they are the percent in the occupycuba movement.
He's a little taller than you are.
Is that a fire truck?
Where does Tom live?
ivysblog angelina jolie s in lebanon today visiting refugees not only is she the world s most beautiful woman but also a passionate humanitarian.
this post is part of our special coverage europe in crisis.
It'll only take a minute of your time.
a declaration of internet freedom global voices advox.
ville de phnom penh le royal palace photo by busy leon.
Go find Tom.
the following video is from a demonstration in morocco s largest city casablanca posted by the gladiator.
china veto of un security council draft resolution on syria draws praise and grief global voices.
the matter certainly seems to have touched a nerve in china beijing s official response was brief and moderate and authorities began to censor key terms such as hydrogen bomb on chinese social media.
paris france.
the bahrain center for human rights recently published messages from inside the walls of bahrain s prisons including from activists nabeel rajab and zainab al khawaja an audio version of al khawaja s message has been posted to youtube.
they can t say they weren t warned.
milton ramirez who writes about ecuador recommends dialogo con joselias es which discusses the role of provincial autonomies in the new constitution joselias criticizes a recent editorial in the newspaper el telegrafo which dismisses the call of the province of manabi for increased autonomy.
photo mohamed el raai pic twitter com l nit dz.
according to the united nations educational scientific and cultural organization unesco niemeyer also deserves the title of universal artists according to a statement by director general irina bokova.
What happened isn't a secret.
print it or download it to your devices works fine as flight entertainment.
so the support can only be external and each leader has to find patrons to support this political addiction to a certain extent all our politicians become pawns in the regional chess game they can at best try to be opportunistic.
It was cold yesterday.
russia is reportedly banning linkedin global voices.
afghanistan explosions of violence global voices.
also on global voices online.
hu xijin editor in chief of the people s daily tabloid global times made today what is perhaps one of the most vocal statements in support of china s decision to veto the draft resolution ending up under heavy fire in the comments section taking offense at susan rice s reported disgust at china s vote hu confuses her zh with condoleezza rice but also writes.
These books belong to me.
image of a google doodle from flickr by eggtm used under a creative commons license.
How many rooms are there in your house?
One day, she told me that she wanted a pet cat.
we will continue to promote new images of the virtual police and update our internet security tips in an effort to make the image of the virtual police more user friendly and more in tune with how web surfers use the internet the beijing public security ministry said in a statement issued yesterday.
on fergananews com which broke unconfirmed reports of a stroke in the middle of the day commenters were speculating about a potential life without the man that has ruled the country since before the break up of the soviet union and is credited as the architect of one of the world s worst human rights records.
lamin lost his loved ones during the journey from libya.
ultimately it appeared to be the end of the political binary between the march and march alliances that has gripped the country since but first.
some people pay special attention to some items in the wash while neglecting others.
global voices gv let s start with the most important how do you physically and mentally feel right now.
the china national day is on october.
image from ostagram ru.
syria no more blogging global voices.
have you no shame asked a member of the mailing list for the international relations section of the german political science association deutsche vereinigung fur politische wissenschaft ir list in an open letter in response this issue gave rise to a heated debate among the plus members of the mailing list.
I work for an oil company.
yuzuko horigome and her violin photo used with permission from change org japan.
I need your help.
new research.
as liberated aleppo was falling the horror broadcast by media activists in real time thousands across the world took to the streets to protest the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding while such solidarity is vital some may bitterly complain that it came six years too late the last pockets of grassroots democracy and creative resistance are now being crushed and the syrian conflict is mutating into a much darker and more terrifying phase.
Have you ever been to America?
africa.
on twitter moad aldabbagh shares this photograph of a sign on a restaurant in saudi arabia it reads kindly note that unescorted ladies are not allowed.
in an interview with andrew phelps published wednesday morning by harvard s nieman lab ethan explains that the center will be looking beyond citizen journalism to investigate how communities communicate more broadly and how they make decisions about becoming civically active.
egypt tourists treated poorly global voices.
there are some myths and misconceptions in pakistan about the shia sect of muslims faisal kapadia at deadpan thoughts starts a series to debunk those myths.
it is not only the activism scene that has changed over the past couple of years the military has also become more present in public life and a mix of military police state has become very active and in control at the same time the state has developed a stronger grip on investors and different media channels and newspapers this was nothing new per se but the state s monitoring of dominant public narratives and the mindset of the majority of egyptians led to a practice of ignoring different narratives about what is happening here out of genuine fear or in an effort to support the state many egyptians have turned a blind eye towards grave human rights violations deterioration of the economy and the crushing of basic liberties.
on october human rights defender mohammed al maskati was summoned for interrogation by local police al maskati the founder and president of the bahrain youth society for human rights byshr works to document human rights abuses and organizes training workshops in bahrain frontline defenders is calling for an end to the ongoing harassment of al maskati.
How can I help you?
New facts about ancient China have recently come to light.
egypt revolutionary stencils global voices.
rv is there a difference between the way the conflict is seen from outside and how it actually is.
She must still be in her twenties.
The train leaves in ten minutes.
I think Tom likes me.
English has many loan words from French.
from saudi arabia american bedu shares the pain shared by the second wife.
zambia will be sending light welterweight boxer gilbert choombe judoka boas munyonga swimmers jade howard and zane jordan and runners prince mumba gerald phiri and chauness choosha.
lobna tweets ar.
abu dhabi site blocked global voices.
of the polled journalists who reported that they were attacked by security forces said they did not receive any apology from the police or the ministry of interior furthermore only of the perpetrators were administratively punished.
travel back in time with these photos of early th century cambodia global voices.
He went abroad for the purpose of studying English.
Excuse me, who is this woman?
I'm a baker.
egypt ashamed of being egyptian global voices.
jadaliyya publishes an interview with sultan alqassemi about social media arab monarchies and muhammad morsi.
i also gave a quick presentation about how gv authors build their stories from social media updates.
They had only one child.
bangladesh signs of an emerging country global voices.
and following a coup attempt in turkey on july that erdogan argues gulen organised this means the days of gulen linked institutions in azerbaijan are effectively finished.
asraranwar spoken to family who have said their internet has been cut off iraq feb.
Please take off your hat.
iirwah seriously i don t understand why is it a crime to celebrate newroz how many more kurds gonna get injured killed.
august.
when it comes to washing soft toys i have no idea how to hang them up to dry so this is what i did although doesn t it look like it s enjoying itself lol.
Are you at home?
raskalov vit shares mind blowing rooftop pictures of snowy krasnoyarsk city in siberia on the pictures bridges snow and heating steam multi storey houses mixed with industrial landscapes.
I have no siblings.
Let's go to the beach.
another video from the same demonstration in benghazi by enoughgaddafi.
in this episode we featured creative commons licensed music from the free music archive including songs by blue dot sessions called ray gun fasterfasterbrighter cc by nc and under suspicion by lee rosevere cc by.
egypt.
a coalition of more than syrian media organizations has launched a campaign demanding an end to abuses against media workers in the country who face threats from both government entities and terrorist groups a petition launched by freepressforsyria com reads facing retaliation if they denounce the abuses aloud and facing extinction if they don t syrian media have chosen the former despite intimidation and threats syrian media are uniting for the first time and standing up together to demand an end to the crimes committed against all journalists sign the petition at avaaz org.
Generally speaking, history repeats itself.
a strong earthquake hit awaji island of japan on saturday morning april twitter user jun took this photo ja of the devastation seven people were severely injured according to a report ja.
chile photos of october student protest global voices.
You can use it anytime.
We haven't had those kinds of problems yet.
He struck a match.
these and other experiences show the vulnerability of two step verification in cases where an adversary is capable of sms interception.
when i still worked for opendemocracy i once emailed rebecca mackinnon in to ask whether global voices wanted to help organize a blogging workshop at the world social forum in venezuela both rebecca and david sasaki who was americas editor at the time were very helpful in putting me in touch with venezuelan bloggers in the end i sort of ended up going solo but it meant a lot to have global voices as a network to lean on.
I appreciate this.
Tom hid under the table.
You haven't washed your hands yet, have you?
It was love at first sight.
independent news outlet animal politico reported that before his death adame had received threats on several occasions warning him to stop his work as a journalist his wife frida urtiz said she felt enormous pressure as well because of the work she did with adame.
i have been involved in helping many individuals and institutions over the past years both in assessing their threats and risks and in helping them integrate proper measures to maintain their privacy and security this has opened my eyes to how the idea of a threat has changed deeply over time and our definition of what is a problem is expanding it is also obvious that sometimes our ability to make a proper guess or estimation is weaker as there is not enough logical input or variables to count on the situation is very chaotic always changing and often surprising.
Whenever I see you, I feel happy.
it ought to become something understood in the language that disabled people do things not in spite of or because of but with their disabilities.
citizen media workshop photograph by eddie avila.
sovereigns of cyberspace.
Who cares about facts?
some japanese people really thought haruki murakami would finally win the nobel prize this time global voices.
tarek cheniti notes fr.
to take part just follow the simple steps outlined on the challenge s website http mememl org which includes finding an image adding text and hashtags including mememl and sharing on your favorite social media platform make sure you tag someone inviting them to create their own meme in their mother language.
waleedabulkhair january.
one thing i did a bit differently in this film is really take my time particularly in post production when you are working on a small budget there is a lot of pressure to finish the film quickly it s said that two things make a movie money and time if you don t have money take time on this film the edit period was very long i re cut the show several times kept searching we also shot pickups very late in the day when we really could not afford to do so but i wanted to make the film as good as it could be i did not want to compromise the film because of our lack of financial resource.
She's much heavier than him.
Where are they?
jessica carrillo collaborated in this post.
I admire his skill at driving.
I was vaccinated against the flu.
there are many questions about the role of netizens themselves in a post arab spring mena these have given way to frustration and uncertainty about what to do next we believe there s a need today more than ever for a meeting of this kind.
iranian blogger asmoun abi writes fa.
el salvador visiting el calvario church global voices.
for that he was taken to court and threatened with imprisonment the district attorney of oran the second largest city in algeria located kilometers northwest of the capital algiers wanted the cartoonist to admit that he had the intention of insulting the president but ghanem categorically denied that he had such intention.
i am tired of these dumb poles from the provinces that come to buenos aires to file complaints i decide what the price of yerba is and screw anyone that doesn t like it.
why don t iranians wear neckties.
march ngo hosted a conference on the illegal practices of the cyber crime unit in lebanon the organization posted on youtube testimonies of internet users who were questioned by the country s cybercrime bureau for expressing themselves online.
He couldn't run very fast.
we can know a lot about this war but simply knowing facts isn t nearly enough to change its course demonstrated facts do not necessarily influence the outcome of events that is the essence of understanding power and its limits.
gv you are known under the pseudonym z almost months after the fall of the ben ali regime you still prefer to conceal your identity why is that.
the national department of sports and entertainment in burkina faso published a report on the role of sports as a vector of peace and development in burkina faso pdf in fr.
avaaz protect syria s children now.
well i don t get it i will really appreciate it if our dear k shanmugam will kindly enlighten us here since he has been paid so much to play a part in the governing of singapore city.
it was a crazy month all around from crazy weather to nutty internet connections and price hikes.
iraq six months before the us invasion global voices.
leading bahraini human rights defender maryam alkhawaja was detained on august upon landing in the island kingdom to visit her ailing imprisoned father also a prominent rights advocate who had begun a hunger strike the week prior in a piece for the guardian journalist sara yasin wrote of her friend.
is there a trusted person s that you would like to authorize to make major decisions on your behalf such as whether to conduct a public campaign if yes please make sure to discuss your preferences with that person the following are among the topics you could talk about.
we can watch several snow statues in rasht in kourosh ziabari s blog.
mohamed elgohary meg i began to check out global voices as eman abdelrahman began contributing and sharing gv posts as well as asking me if i wanted to contribute back then it was just a year since i began blogging and partially i didn t think i was capable enough to write in english in the same time gv began to mention blog posts i wrote as i was active then in covering court sessions where policemen were tried for human rights violations blogging under the nickname irc president.
america movil ranked fifth out of the telecommunications companies evaluated disclosing little about policies and practices affecting freedom of expression and privacy for example the company lacked disclosure about how it responds to government requests to shut down networks and did not clearly disclose how it handles government or private requests to restrict content or hand over user information.
Lack of food had left him weak and exhausted.
It's brand new.
on july th a group of people organised a silent protest in krakow in solidarity with gaza protesters printed names of all the children martyred in gaza during operation protective edge.
israel relations with the germans and poles global voices.
ahmed lababidi says he told immigration authorities that he d be in danger if he went back because he s criticized the syrian government on facebook but korean officials told him to consider another way of staying in korea.
What did you do?
Let's discuss that problem later.
the people that deserve most respect and prayer are staff team who stay and try to rescue the nuclear power plant with determination to sacrifice themselves rt fnn news http fnnne ws fvtcyk jp fnn.
Tom always shouts when he is angry.
I have a feeling I've met her somewhere before.
the goal of coca grower unions and bolivia s government is to depenalise not only coca production but also its consumption which is banned by the united nations single convention on narcotic drugs something president morales has called a historic mistake.
I work every day except Sunday.
this post is part of our special coverage egypt revolution.
with controversy surrounding the nuclear deal between india and the us only increasing greatbong reflects on the political dynamics within india.
from yemen omar barsawad introduces us to two historical monuments from his country.
Shouldn't you go home?
youngmalian att mali s president was democratically elected by the people and his mandate was over in june what rights do the soldiers have to act on behalf of the people mali.
on the other hand hepatitis b and c are transmitted through infected blood products unprotected sex infected items such as needles razor blades dental or medical equipment unscreened blood transfusions or from mother to child at birth.
mideast youth has launched an ipad exclusive application that showcases revolutionary leaders and movements in the past years and allows people to learn about how these revolutionaries and leaders are connected to each other check making of a century out here.
bloggers reactions.
but please don t let the conflict in syria be about opposing america let it be about syria and what might actually help syrians you know the actually existing people who are dying by the tens of thousands in this brutal war but if you can t do that then do me a favor and please shut up.
observations of a jordanian praised the move saying.
rambling in the city blames the mindset of the patriarch society.
her post prompted rosebud a blogger whom i don t think i ve featured before in my roundups to further elaborate on this topic.
Tom is a student.
wild at heart calls for donation to save the endangered pink dolphins near the taiwan sea.
between and german colonialists committed a holocaust against the herero and the nama exterminating as many as herero and nama in one particularly gruesome detail some of the victims skulls were even sent to germany for scientific research into supposed racial inequality.
adrienne wong from shanghaiist noticed that the amnesty international anti olympic ads and adidas olympic ads were designed by the same company tbwa.
A rabbit has long ears.
Take this or that.
from saudi arabia mustafa hussain tweets ar unemployment corruption tribalism weak education curricula state owned media full prisons bad government services oil which is not its own all this and more in saudi arabia.
what action are you going to take to make your mark and improve someone s day or life.
Why not?
razanspeaks thoughts and hearts are with you redrazan one of the bravest people i have come to know on twitter freerazan syria.
however we should be conscious about the act of sending out information to others and remind ourselves to be critical about the information we receive it is important to have this kind of attitude when using social media especially in a time like this when information can be shared with a single click i consider this to be the first step to prevent social media from entering into darkness.
photo gallery for the remangate campaign es through the paicma website.
egypt in photographs from the streets of cairo global voices.
yes blame egypt for it.
on his youtube channel he shares videos featuring local songs and showing the caucasian landscapes he has also made a few videos about the language itself.
lebanon the lighter side of war global voices.
eduardo bowles concludes on his blog post es.
I couldn't have done it without you. Thank you.
hello world.
I saw her enter the room.
datum of freedom an iranian blogger says fa i do not know why shanbeh speaks with afghan accent it would be better if he spoke fluent persian because his characteristics such as opportunism are iranian not afghan.
bukeni and madeleine discuss their hopes for the outcome of the lubanga trial and hopes justice will be served for child soldiers everywhere.
Whose paper is this?
the first blog post ru criticized tuleyev for a pronatalist initiative ru that awarded rubles roughly usd to any couples who agreed to register their marriages on november shipilov estimated that the project cost nearly million rubles one short of the sixteen million the government had collected for sick children in an october fundraising event ru that included visits by presumably well compensated movie stars like sophia loren shipilov wrote.
i had also wondered why some families would choose to leave the established gated refugee camps set up by the jordanian government and unhcr and opt to live in the informal tented settlements with barely any support i learned that life in the gated camps wasn t much of a life either they were overcrowded offered only limited job opportunities and were generally not safe those living in them often feel trapped unsafe and desperate though by moving outside the camps they were mere exchanging one set of hardships for another.
teaching local residents to record and edit audio recordings on audacity for a community podcast that can be uploaded online as well as distributed to local radio stations for a wider reach.
furthermore in venezuela fans of the estudiantina created a facebook group es where they share comments videos articles and pictures of the estudiantina komaba in the bio they explain the story of the group and some of its dynamics.
Everything's going to be great as soon as Tom gets here.
One of my suitcases is missing.
detail of illustrator eduardo sanabria s image alluding to media censorship and self censorship in venezuela used with permission.
I know that he was busy.
Let's get some sleep.
I've never seen anything like that.
I caught a beautiful butterfly.
Tom is really interested in Greek mythology.
alexander says he always tries to make conversation with passengers but he pays close attention to their reactions if somebody doesn t reciprocate or they answer monosyllabically then that s the end of the chatter.
Whose books are these?
jeha s nail starts off an article by writing how the lebanese so often get lost in the debates of who did what and to whom while their politician and innocent bystanders get blown up with morbid regularity jeha continues and describes how the survivors are quietly holed up in the phoenicia waiting to meet again in another useless parliamentary meeting while their bosses negotiate fruitlessly to get out of the impasse and like many others jeha would like to be spared from trying to understand the idiotic dialog of the puppets who claim to rule us lebanese.
so i suppose i ll just have to do my best to stomach the debates and try to keep a lid on my weltschmerz even if the political dramas playing out on the american stage fill me with the urge to throw tomatoes at the actors at least i like tomatoes now.
the heroines of these stories neither live in castles nor wait for their charming prince to come and rescue them the only thing that have in common is that they re latin americans who escaped the cliches of their time.
Here's the bus.
Please lend me your knife.
I'm sure she will return soon.
for more information or interviews contact hisham almiraat director global voices advocacy or ellery biddle editor global voices advocacy at advocacy at globalvoicesonline dot org.
bolivar had a very clear perception in fact that is why he did everything in his power to create an alternative hegemony the gran colombia consisting of the current colombia venezuela and ecuador with claims to guayaquil and above all the amazon river and it s gigantic surrounding region the gran colombia emerged as a counterbalance to the alleged peruvian threat.
I have to go to bed.
iran.
egypt inferiority complex global voices.
Wait a minute, Tom!
the site theme and translation system are built entirely on top of the open source wordpress platform using lots of custom theme and plugin code as well as various awesome plugins from the wordpress community.
Our school is near the station.
iran new foreign minister has a facebook page global voices.
He is a potential world champion.
Do you know if he's coming to the party?
China is a huge country.
I am grateful to you for inviting me to the party.
he had been accused of insulting islam and the iranian authorities and for being in contact with foreign media this news has not yet been confirmed by iranian authorities or human rights organizations.
He is very handsome.
yes and no campaigns have picked up steam in the official two week campaign period which ends on may but campaigning before or after this official period or by non registered groups was strictly forbidden.
today is the august bank holiday in the united kingdom which means sunny weather fun outdoors and notting hill carnival the largest caribbean style carnival in europe and one of the largest summer festivals anywhere in up to a million people may have participated either as masqueraders or as spectators.
paivikki karhula data driven futures censorship takes new forms.
I got thirsty.
English is difficult, isn't it?
different pictures of injuries caused by rubber bullets posted by yaqoobabdualla.
Get me a chair, please.
We watched the soccer game on TV.
first survey.
Schools were built.
track the work flow against the stated goals of the project.
She fell in love with a younger man.
the blog greater syria posted a heart breaking story under the title yasin and maryam sabbagh end the siege on homs which describes the murder of a brother and sister yassin and maryam who were killed by a mortar bomb fired by the regime s forces in pro regime districts while playing outside their home a video of their martyrdom with an emotional comment said.
this is how we hang up clothes at our house lol.
We understand.
That could be significant.
photo by carmen helena gonzalez used with permission.
I meant it.
gv face global voices on the us elections global voices.
alloco is a traditional dish in west and central africa it s made of plantains fried in peanut or palm oil and is served as a snack or to accompany a main dish alloco originated in open air restaurants also called allocodrome by ivorians which sell classic ivorian dishes like attieke and poulet braise braised chicken at low prices.
That's something you need to remember.
She doesn't like sushi.
I've tried to warn you.
those at the shelter tend to farmland and rear livestock but their produce is shunned at local markets due to stigma around the disease photo and caption by pyay kyaw the irrawaddy.
f s is grateful to angelina.
I want to read that book.
lebanon update also wrote about the arab league s initiative explaining that it proposes to return to the presidency some of the political powers it lost in the taif.
the decades of war and terrorism have placed afghanistan among the world s most dangerous countries despite the progress made by the country since the ousting of the taliban in most media writing about afghanistan focus stubbornly on negative issues such as bomb blasts suicide attacks and casualties reports in such media feature terrifying pictures that lead most people to never want to visit the war torn but very beautiful country.
Are you busy tomorrow morning?
when a number of egyptian protestors attacked the headquarters of the hated state security in different egyptian cities their aim was not to show their contempt for the unpopular institution a symbol of mubarak s regime but it was rather to rewrite history.
the real torturers are not these security guards but those who are governing angola.
He speaks English with a German accent.
this story is not unique about people from some other villages face hardships similar to those of mung ra and brang mai.
I found this ring on the street this morning.
a wall of the esi scientific local club in algiers photo by ophelia noor used with permission.
lc what would you describe as the hardest part.
the presenters of the daily magazine morning information on net mr kostas arvanitis and ms marilena katsimi made unacceptable insinuations against the minister of public order nikos dendias without even giving him the right to express himself while it seemed that they commented on the case prejudging the outcome of the judicial decision.
south east asia abortion policies global voices.
nobody in indonesia feels sure as to what motivates the criminals to abduct a child to serve their purpose one thing is clear this trend is growing and it grows at an alarming pace the climax of such child abduction criminal trend was the release of raisya a year old pre nursery student yesterday afternoon after being kidnapped for about days in jakarta.
photographer md moyazzem mostakim shares dozens of wonderful photos of the floating market on his facebook page timur photography which has gained viral appeal online with mostakim s permission we have highlighted some of his photographs below.
It's bedtime.
Tom is the only one who really knows what happened.
may the best blogs win.
at maryam is the sort of woman that dictators have nightmares about she is one of the most prominent voices condemning bahrain s ongoing human rights violations which have only continued in the years following a brutal crackdown on popular protests in february.
The hotel was burned down.
zi sun uses the scripture of goddess of democracy which was collectively created by beijing arts students in in his design.
in spite of devastatingly high hiv infection rates brazil has managed to turn their tragedy into a story of survival since the brazilian government has guaranteed access to antiretroviral drugs to anyone in need blogger olhares da stelinha pt says treatment alone is not enough.
Aren't you thirsty?
They shared the money.
boat launching ceremony image from we are all radioactive sneak peek on facebook page.
I'm just looking, thank you.
i live in jabal al hussein which is a pretty crowded place i quit my last job because it was minutes away and no one would agree to drive me back home.
I'll take this one.
Can you see the difference?
I'm such a coward that I rarely visit the dentist.
I want a new computer.
eligible web sites must be accessible to the public with no password restrictions or registration requirements nominations for the bobs are open until march.
dmitry olshansky photo facebook.
You should tell the truth.
africa vloggers bloggers and movies global voices.
firouzeh says.
it seems this campaign is offering a real connection between iranians and israelis to share a message we can only dream for love and peace in the name of mankind.
egypt visa to heaven global voices.
Can you hear me?
the group called fr for a nationwide demonstration on monday august to encourage civil society and the moroccan political elite to open a national debate on measures to reform the system.
The birds flew away in all directions.
I am only joking.
I'm afraid Tom doesn't want to talk to you.
Take care of the kids.
They lived in Spain for several years.
abulkhair the head of the monitor of human rights in saudi arabia has been in prison in for nine months now and his account is being run by friends.
on sajed s site we read that in the near future a stamp to honor haj rezvan will be published in iran the cultural foundation for the holy defense of khormshahr says this stamp will be published in a series depicting the khormshah defense and south lebanon resistance khoramshahr was a symbol of resistance during the iran iraq war for many iranians.
lou from saudi arabia pays tribute to jailed saudi blogger fouad al farhan in this post.
What's she doing?
more often than not when the words revolutionary armed forces of colombia farc show up in any kind of medium they are a prelude for yet another story about the armed conflict that has plagued colombia for the past years.
american bombs made it inaccessible but viewing this historical site in laos is possible again thanks to drones global voices.
activist mostafa hegazy is happy for shawkan s family.
What? I can't hear you guys.
Why couldn't you come yesterday?
a week ago my dear friend and brother mohammed omer was nearly beaten to death and tortured by israeli security officers.
global voices readers around the world help us bring more global bloggers to this meme by writing a post in any language in your own blog about the five things you love the most about being a mother or father tag your friends add globalmoms to your posts and tweets and help us get around the world in clicks.
I have to attend this class.
You have to go.
The story reminded me of my father.
All Tom really needed was a hug.
Don't mention our plan to anybody.
the daily star project redesign by beirut spring.
If you're not with us then you're against us.
I went for a walk in the park.
after a number of postings on the thread kambaki came back and wrote.
over the course of a year the bicicloteca carried out more than loans without any bureaucracy drawing on a collection of more than books currently the instituto mobilidade verde works to oversee the project and its expansion to other ngos interested in adopting it the bicicloteca also lends braille books for the visually impaired promotes activities in public squares and holds historic walks pt through the streets.
indigenous in one of the buildings of the complex on the wall it reads want to kill a people then rob them of their culture photo facebook aldeia maracana.
iraq pundit shares his thoughts on iranian president mahmood ahmadinejad s visit to his country here.
I will be glad to help you anytime.
it seems that football fans might be able to do what arab governments have miserably failed to achieve or even address lifting the illegal inhuman israeli siege of gaza.
distracting the work of the central agency through social media and making false accusations against this governmental body causing problems in the country in abuse of the crisis that the country is going through rioting violence and calling for an illegal protest vandalism blocking traffic and starting fires in public and private properties risking the lives of citizens attacking security men and vandalizing ambulances and throwing stones on them and on security men.
There is a big market for coffee.
geospatial technology and human rights global voices.
You have cleaned your shoes, haven't you?
I wish I could live near your house.
vahid nikgoo drew a cartoon where ahmad lotfi ashtyani looks himself in a mirror and says when i take you to court and sentence you to lashes you will learn not to show me like that.
while uzbekistan did not make out of old karimov a leadership cult on the scale seen in neighbouring turkmenistan or even in kazakhstan there is no question that the regime s identity is tied up in his persona raising fears of a power vacuum and instability once he leaves power.
She concentrated on one thing.
My grandfather was born in 1920.
My mother is angry.
shifaa from jordan brings us the lessons learned and implications of the parliamentary elections held this week the good news is that a woman won a seat without resorting to the women s quota.
The birds flew away in all directions.
He wants vengeance.
I'll get some glasses.
netizen report draft laws in egypt could lock down social media global voices advox.
students between the ages of and worldwide are invited to produce short films max min on the articles of the universal declaration of human rights with a special focus on sustainability migration refugees and global warming for the video competition for the this human world film festival in vienna via ypmn.
Are we good to go?
That child was left in the sun too long.
shwedagon pagoda is the most sacred site of worship for buddhists in myanmar the structure reached its current height during the th century today it stands as the symbol of national pride in the former capital city of yangon myanmar has a buddhist majority population.
the web tool essentially collects and curates information from around the web matching survivor stories on youtube for example with the precise location where these individuals were in nagasaki when the bomb detonated.
The castle is beautiful.
I don't care what anyone says.
bahraini blogger mahmood al yousif calls upon his country s member parliament to resign.
I don't have a girlfriend.
Put on your cap.
find others using the motherlanguage hashtag and retweet them.
soheila sadegh tweeted.
roads to iraq rounds up some reactions to the iranian president s visit to iraq.
beirut lebanon photo by thalia rahme.
Tom hasn't been indicted.
omani blogger muscati is back to wearing glasses after the effects of his lasek operation wore off.
jordan the gay husband global voices.
hollaback is a movement dedicated to ending street harassment using mobile technology street harassment is one of the most pervasive forms of gender based violence and one of the least legislated against comments from you d look good on me to groping flashing and assault are a daily global reality for women and lgbtq individuals but it is rarely reported and it s culturally accepted as the price you pay for being a woman or for being gay at hollaback we don t buy it.
check out this video directed by ishani k dutta and produced and uploaded to youtube by the public diplomacy division of india s ministry of external affairs.
del del writes fa that rabani must have overcome big temptations to return the money since he estimates the amount of money would equal years of a street sweeper s salary.
lebanon without a president global voices.
the author of the blog cachitos de mi vida bits of my life es addresses the issue of the metro questions its efficiency and reflects on the subsidy on the ticket.
I gave up smoking a year ago.
afghanistan the rambo syndrom global voices.
bolivia blogger named to national electoral court global voices.
Your help is necessary to our success.
anas oulmidi oulmidianas october.
wat arun bangkok thailand.
so far blogs from countries have registered to take part in blog action day register your blog today and join the global conversation the tags for this year are bad humanrights oct.
according to the group hiv aids dissidents and their children at least minors in russia have died in the past several years thanks to untreated hiv infections thirteen of those deaths were children under the age of ten the group says.
rabaa square before and after august photo mazidan cc by sa.
Please give me a piece of bread.
on twitter arab revolution shares a link to a video allegedly showing a saudi protester in qatif getting shot the video is dated february.
saudi arabia maysoon azzam is not a robot global voices.
after news of adame s death broke luis de tlacuilo a twitter user made the following comment.
shadihamid whatever you think abt monaeltahawy s piece says a lot that the very ppl she s trying to liberate seem to mostly disagree w her.
I'm really embarrassed.
I'm trying to help.
He is young and immature.
in gaza sharyn lock writes about art being shown in a destroyed hospital building as part of the world health day commemorations three artists are displaying their work in this same building art that is a response to the israeli attacks on hospitals and medical workers.
bermuda why the homophobia global voices.
tunisian security forces target journalists covering anti austerity protests global voices.
what was the most surprising thing for you while fighting with this disease.
We enjoyed playing baseball.
joshua landis links to reports about a coup plot against syrian president bashar al assad that was quietly crushed without the world noticing in syria comment.
lebanese american journalist and blogger roqayah chamseddine commented in a post entitled us and them on helpless women and orientalist imagery.
tonight i went to hunt pokemon it s a very amusing game at least i now have excuse to move since i barely do.
what has been going on for the past couple of days has been nothing short of insane it has gone from cold to warm back to cold i look forward to the weekend just so i can go riding but that is shot because of the km h winds it has made it difficult for people to be outside so most of everyone is staying in or going to the malls.
Let's make a trade.
I'm needy.
in this f cking chaotic city where art is a privilege walking the streets on a whim a necessary whim in search of freedom of expression.
tranquil dragon in sendai miyagi prefecture posted this screenshot.
I bought some fresh eggs which had just come from the farm.
bahraini mahmood al yousif brings us the story of maya whose marriage in india and conversion into hinduism led the bahraini authorities to confiscate her passport.
women participate in iran s city councils the image is taken from a video by nabz iran.
Do you remember when I saw you last?
thuggery.
police intercept three berlin buses on the way to frankfurt photo by blockupy on twitter.
this post is part of our special coverage of egypt protests.
I also like cake.
I'm coming.
for me the creative process of crafting this film has been positive because every story in the successful telling allows you to define yourself in this case myself my language my world.
Would you please pay attention?
kenya is home to the much famed mobile money transfer system here known as m pesa pesa being the swahili equivalent of money the mpesa payments and money transfer platform has offered new ways of seamless transactions both online and offline and is proving insightful in the global market as a payments solution.
Tom tried to kill me.
I'm just a plain old office worker.
What do you like to eat?
Come and help us.
i lived it all.
parque ibirapuera ibirapuera park the most famous in the city the christmas tree is famous and a popular visiting spot in december even on rainy days.
Could you give me a hand in the kitchen, please?
Give this book to Tom.
ali abdulemam how did i get out i don t want to talk about it because i still need to protect the people who helped me who hosted me so i prefer not to talk about this and instead to focus on the situation in bahrain this is what matters now i m free i m safe but the people in bahrain are still struggling with this tyrannous regime what we all need is to help people in bahrain get their universal rights this is what matters to expose this regime to understand that it s not any more the middle ages it s the st century where everything is open and the exchange of information is available everywhere.
more reactions from bloggers worldwide about the tunisian crisis can be found here.
egypt the influential role of women in history global voices.
Is this place far from the bank?
here is brett bruen from co sponsor us embassy in madagascar discussing about the apps africa competition.
iran ahmadinejad s car a woman and a hungry old man global voices.
i unfollowedghonimbecause when i heard about the book u ve been the whole time imprisoned what do u actually have to say in it.
united states based prince mumba will be representing zambia in the meters at the london olympics photo source daily mail co zm.
She still depends on her parents.
He declined my proposal.
Who is that person?
my first reaction of course is how easy it is for society the authorities are reflecting a larger social attitude to ask women to behave within limits just like recent incidents in which airline staff asked people with disabilities to deplane the attitude reeks of a mindset in which women are considered weak disadvantaged and mostly a problem.
why are americans afraid of clowns.
They were forced to withdraw.
this how el nacional looks like in cantv the most important internet provider servers.
rising voices when the village awakes a new malian culture blog.
school kids hide their faces as many consider getting photographed a sin photo by aaquib khan.
I'll come back.
heavy security presence.
pessego remembers seeing independence in as a boy in nd grade after having worked for an agricultural company spraying pesticides in the first years of mozambican independence he was forced to abandon his studies and never completed middle school later he says pt.
Who are you?
He told me that he wanted to leave the company.
support global voices help make the world a more connected place global voices.
we continued talking during coffee and lunch we also played some short videos about global voices and el gohary spoke about how fun it is to be a member of such a huge worldwide community.
It is new.
the umbrellas and those carrying them had obstructed the stage and thus deleted.
traditional recipes from across the francophone world global voices.
aside from users posts on facebook that include these images twitter and instagram users also seem to be doing some pro bono positive advertising for the alternative side of budapest.
govt not sure over un durban conference.
It may rain tomorrow.
You like English, don't you?
pablo sanchez decadente es proposes another solution.
I went to many shops to look for the book.
wat arun or temple of dawn is one of the most popular destinations in bangkok the capital of thailand this buddhist temple is located along the west bank of the chao phraya river thailand has a buddhist majority population.
president jacob zuma had the crowd in stitches as he tried to learn the diski dance.
ali in bali indonesia.
a new facebook page volleyball for tajikistan has recently been launched to raise funds for two volleyball teams created in the country s south within eight days after the launch people from across the united states donated enough money to purchase uniforms for young tajikistani volleyball players including girls.
Can't you put it off until tomorrow?
Where is his house?
accroding to fa free keyboard iranians have access to google gmail and blogfa a leading perisan provider of blogs again the blogger says it seems that people who blocked these sites found out that they did a stupid thing these three sites were blocked for hours the blogger informs us how we can go beyond filterting and read our gmail or search in google.
proceeds from the sales of the music collection photography book and documentary will go in their entirety to support charities and organizations including global voices online.
thanks to those persistent people who have been voting every day of the past week belgrade is now ahead of such cities as amsterdam athens tokyo toronto barcelona and kiev.
the arab journalism awards are now accepting submissions.
He's so young.
for more details on how to take part take a look at the campaign website.
puertodansk the danish puerto rican society is an association for the ethnically confused i m danish puerto rican myself and i wanted to create a group that celebrates bringing different cultures together in unusual ways you don t have to be danish or puerto rican to become a member in fact all people who join online are free to call themselves danish puerto ricans no matter where they re originally from.
Welcome.
bahrain what environment global voices.
while the sfax prosecutor started an investigation against ghattassi who threatened journalists with rape it remains unclear whether it will lead to any conviction he along with three other police officers was expelled from the union representing internal security forces for immoral behavior towards others the union said in a statement published on february the statement did not state attacks against journalists as the reason behind this decision.
I asked Tom to stop following us.
does it mean we should maintain a balance of different types of pollution.
cherine atalla tweeted this picture from the protest which reads hands off syria.
I admire you for your courage.
She bent down.
the bicicloteca is ridden by robson mendonca a year old librarian who used to live on the streets of sao paulo reading the george orwell novel animal farm changed his perspective proving that reading transforms people s lives.
this grants program makes funding available to first nations metis and inuit communities to pay for equipment digitization technical staff and travel to and from trainings five rounds of funding have been completed and a sixth call for proposals recently closed in march examples of projects funded by the indigitization grant program include funds awarded to.
Please circle the right answer.
nous ne manquerons pas de communiquer et d informer sur cette seconde affaire qui n a eu d autres objectifs que de maintenir jabeur mejri en prison en depit de la grace presidentielle.
today is blog action day and this year we re joining pens pads and keyboards to discuss inequality.
for several people it is the first time they have communicated directly with either an israeli or iranian and some iranians voiced fears of repercussion from their government.
no longer will brokers put up smug faces on wall street something bizarre is actually happening the wretched of the earth are being made to bail the rich out of their folly.
The answer is right.
it s girl power we are having a lot of fun the s helped us a lot feminists lead the struggle and some core ideas have persisted culture minister khalida toumi is a feminist she has been in office for ten years.
heat the oil a little bit and add the chile mixture let it cook for minutes on low heat add salt and pepper to taste and add a little lemon juice if you want i love it that way.
Do you want me to come?
What a wonderful surprise!
a court in rabat has sentenced a young man to serve three months in jail for failing to fast in public during the holy muslim month of ramadan individual freedom a right we are not likely to see protected anytime soon laments yabiladi fr who reports the news.
according to official statistics millions of iranians are estimated to have access to internet connection in cities of iran this figures says more than millions of this iranian users have adsl connection and the rest are connected via dial up iranian government has restricting rules for internet connection of citizens and only academic and business users can have broadband connections more than kbps.
Prices have dropped recently.
After taking a bath, I drank juice.
No one loves war.
Stop that.
one of the goals of this conference was to build a community to share experiences and exchange information on issues like security safe blogging and blogging ethics helle wahlberg of ims reports that kurdish blogger karwan gaznay shared with the audience the perils of blogging in own name and explained about anonymous blogging.
i have no intention to compare but since we regularly face such mad mega natural disasters i mean typhoon it is really unnecessary to imagine how terrible and how bad if such disaster happens to us i would rather believe that this land and its people are strong enough.
iber reports on the tunisian pirate party embattled blogger azyz amami and intellectual property.
This flower is more beautiful than that one.
I saw him playing baseball.
I don't love you.
He might change his mind.
Do you play soccer?
Look carefully. I'm going to show you how it's done.
zahra is the hero of the graphic novel whose year old son mehdi disappeared after participating in demonstrations against iran s election outcome her campaign develops in weekly illustrated panels on the website vote zahra org.
ashenafi had just established the women lawyer s association two years earlier to fight for the rights of women according to ethiopia s then new constitution.
digital citizen is a biweekly review of news policy and research on human rights and technology in the arab world.
on the subject of music enrique figueroa chose es several songs by los tigres del norte a mexican band that tends to include a lot of social content in their lyrics enrique tells us that he chose this music because.
Show me a cheaper one, please.
This is your key.
Muslims believe there is only one God.
Tom did something wrong.
i have conversations with many ai experts who returned from the us they said china had a more open attitude toward new technology for example the implementation of facial recognition technology is a lot easier in china than elsewhere the other side of their view is their success is built upon the lack of awareness on individual rights.
saudi arabia journalist al rabea arrested global voices.
Above all, children need love.
Your friend is here.
Chew your food well.
sharing ways that the wider community can get involved with global voices.
I see Tom.
aren t these disasters sufficient to move the conscience what freedom and democracy and what government reform reconstruction and national unity are those will these events move the corrupt political parties to pm maliki s table what constitution allows the army to kill people and insults and threatens doctors is there any wise man amongst you deputies and ministers where is the islam of the islamic parties where is the democracy of the liberal and patriotic parties.
the smoggy air in beijing has triggered widespread concerns over environment in china however beijing is not alone offbeat china takes a look at the top cities with worst air pollution in china.
just before midnight five cars and a minivan arrived at her home and a group of armed security agents reportedly belonging to bahrain s national security agency nsa raided her home without a warrant they took her away from her husband and children.
I have to go to bed.
Watch your mouth, Tom.
I hope that you won't make the same mistake as Tom.
That's absolutely right.
honduras and guatemala.
sri lanka the current situation on human rights global voices.
Tom slept at the office.
project ideas are not limited to these and we encourage you to be creative yet realistic in your proposals.
flickr user y ganden spotted a japanese bush warbler in the blooming sakura trees cc by nc.
we ended the day by sharing our contacts and encouraging attendees to contact us any time they need advice about their personal projects or joining any part of global voices.
at the moment iranians often encounter a firewall when trying to access websites that appear antagonistic towards the government or the nation s islamic ideals the report did not make mention of the legality of circumvention tools but according to iran s list of computer crimes the distribution of both circumvention technology and instructions to use such tools are both illegal violating these laws can result in severe punishment.
She is a noted singer.
torbon jagland source screenshot of the live broadcast.
I've got no choice.
orange ukraine writes on the prospects of ukraine s european integration.
Mali is one of the poorest countries in Subsaharan Africa.
the leader of the coup in mali capitaine sanogo via youngmalian.
She decided to resign.
No one comes to visit me anymore.
why do koreans wear masks on their faces.
morocco four perspectives on sexual harassment global voices.
We have good news.
from the uae bu jassem posts a circular ar from a government agency urging female employees to dress up conservatively and stop touching themselves in sensitive areas in front of clients.
graffiti by repas workshop image used with permission.
angry chinese blogger summed up the debate about the recall of dangerous toys whether we are to blame the chinese manufacturers multinational toy companies or consumers.
on july authorities released labor rights activist rachid aouine after spending four and half months in jail aouine was arrested in march and sentenced to six months in jail for instigating an unarmed gathering in an ironic facebook update the sarcastic post responded to a government announcement warning law enforcement officers not to take part in protests aouine wrote police officers why don t you go out today to protest against the arbitrary decisions against your colleagues instead of controlling the free activists and the protesters against the shale gas.
rights defender ahmed mansoor appears before uae court.
It tastes really good.
six years later our simple site has grown into an indispensable resource for anyone who wants to know what people are talking and thinking about from cameroon to cambodia it s a labor of love produced by people around the world who see citizen media in all its forms videos photographs podcasts twitter posts facebook updates blogs as a powerful tool to build connections across barriers of language culture and nation.
Perhaps that's true.
difret played to sold out audiences in addis ababa for six weeks when the filmmakers looked to take it abroad they sent it to jolie a well known advocate for women s rights in africa.
some hand picked it up that shoe dropped in the mud.
He couldn't understand the sentence.
I'm glad to see you back.
I'm still here.
I'm a free man.
the authors cite a march facebook post shared amid violent religious riots in central sri lanka that called for the killing of all muslims without sparing even a child because they are dogs despite being reported multiple times the post remained live on facebook for six days with the company first replying that the post did not violate its community standards.
This park is really beautiful and clean.
I admire your courage.
I know you're going to say no.
erkan s field diary discusses turkey s lifting of the headscarf hijab ban in his country.
It makes no difference to me whether he joins us or not.
I opened the door and got out of the car.
Yesterday my uncle bought a dog.
That's what people say.
Feel free to get yourself a drink if you are thirsty.
with full cooperation from the country s social media and e commerce platforms this system enables china s top security authorities to extend their grasp on citizens data and make deft calculations concerning the political inclinations of any individual who participates in public life both online and off.
however the move triggered zh an outpouring of pessimistic response on the popular chinese microblogging site sina weibo many worried that it would a rise in the price of train tickets one web user su qun wrote zh.
after taking and comparing the fingerprint samples required by the law in these proceedings by specialists from the genetics direction the dna tests let us conclude that these remains belong to salvador adame pardo as he was called when he was alive.
Deal us the cards.
The jet landed at Tokyo.
I was only there for three days.
lebanon introducing yamli com global voices.
the south korean twittersphere erupted with various responses although the death of one of the world s most notorious dictators is something people might welcome most south koreans have expressed concern about the instability his sudden death might bring to korean peninsula.
the following video shows the brave women of taiz whose city was shelled by saleh s forces in the evening marching the very next day despite the rain to condemn the violence and demand the trial of saleh and his family video posted by mohammednaruto.
Can you lend me some money?
Thanks for coming over tonight.
Tom is very talkative.
from hotmail account sign in here https outlook live com click on your avatar on the top right and select view account click security privacy tab and select more security settings on the left this will load the security settings page displaying the information you added scroll down and opt to remove your mobile number.
egypt cats can wink too global voices.
after the olympics this environmental movement will continue china can t go back now people know what needs to happen organizations like ours are starting to play a bigger role in society.
the death of the ceiba tree in san agustin has inspired the creation of a wonderful network of people who support each other and believe in environmental causes el guardabosque has also expanded its network of environmentalists and has created a space for exchange with other projects.
That team has strong players.
I love movies.
rubber bullets used against protesters posted by aleradanews.
the nagasaki archive has used google earth to create an interactive map of nagasaki before and after an atomic bomb was dropped on the southwestern japanese city on august.
I would like to study Arabic.
Do you speak Chinese?
tweet a translation to encourage speakers of other indigenous and minority language communities.
security forces repressed protesters.
No one knows his name.
He is too tired to study.
in such conditions practically all the necessary constants for child development are seriously disrupted and the psychological damages of armed conflicts are incalculable these children unable to grow up in an atmosphere of trust and having had to face atrocities from a very young age often develop the conviction that violence is a way like any other to solve disputes and so it is difficult for them to send a message of peace and international security to future generations.
five new mobile games were chosen by the united nations alliance of civilizations as winners in a competition to design apps that promote cultural understanding.
The book is red.
Can you give me a lift to the station?
apostasy cannot be considered as a crime in today s world it is indeed a natural right people should have the right to believe or disbelieve in islam writes turkish blogger mustafa akyol.
Those who know him like him.
jordan double victory global voices.
Tom was the only one in the house.
I don't like watching subtitled movies.
jordan second slap global voices.
Muammar Kaddafi escaped unharmed.
I'll be going to Boston next week, but I'm not really looking forward to it.
jordan rainy amman in photos global voices.
Swimming at night is dangerous.
the nonprofit aids center an organization launched last year by journalist anton krasovsky has appealed to anna kuznetsova russia s commissioner for children s rights asking her office to investigate yakovleva s case.
the clock tower a landmark at the university of jordan photo by yousef dahdouh used with permission.
That's none of your business.
about time.
football soccer fans are preparing for the fifa world cup in south africa next month but right now another football world cup is going on in gaza while palestine may not be able to send a team to south africa a palestine team is competing against foreign residents of gaza who have formed teams representing their countries in a tournament being played over the first two weeks of may palestinian bloggers are thrilled by the tournament and two of them managed to attend a match.
you can read the detailed account of rizk s kidnapping by an eyewitness sara carr also for continuous updates about rizk s status and other related news follow delicious bookmarks benwhite free philip website and facebook group more updates in rizk are also found on twitter here.
No one expected Tom to win.
That's an old trick.
A truck hit the dog.
the calendar is the work of a group called citizen which the russian union of youth selected to design a project that would identify nationally oriented young artists capable of expressing russia s cultural and national values as well as the victories and achievements of modern russia.
we watch the government not the other way around message from moroccan blogger zineb belmkaddem during the arab bloggers meeting in amman photo by amer sweidan used with permission.
last year s winners came from many different places around the globe all promoting care of our environment and resources in less than one minute following are three of the winning films.
I am looking for a job, sir.
Bees make honey.
plus kim fully understands that it is not easy for foreign powers to intervene in north korean internal matters he s got nuclear weapons two million soldiers and also he is backed by china and north korea doesn t have oil who would be willing to take a risk attacking north korea when doing so would likely lead to nothing but trouble so there is no single reason he would be terrified to hear the updated news on libya.
the second arrest according to kareem atef ar and the arabic network for human rights information and global voices advocacy targeted diaa gad who was detained from in front of his house on february.
lao voices introduces interesting snacks from lao markets.
ravitoto is a traditional malagasy dish the principal ingredient is the leaves of the sweet cassava plant which are ground in a mortar and mixed with onions and pork.
three moroccans teens were arrested on october in nador in the rif region of northeast morocco the arrested teens were a year old and year old couple and their year old photographer their crime was posting a picture of the couple kissing outside of their high school on facebook in moroccan law this could be translated into violating public decency.
We're in a hurry.
the egyptian independent media collective mosireen has successfully concluded their crowdfunding campaign the activists collected usd out of the usd they were aiming at.
in puebla.
the loneliness of the journey from the city of alfenas in the state of minas gerais in the center of brazil all the way to mujica s home on the outskirts of uruguayan capital montevideo allowed him to reflect about some aspects of daily life that we usually take for granted as summed up by g website.
global voices challenges people to listen to people beyond their own borders we translate back and forth from blogospheres in the middle east asia africa south america and eastern europe in hopes that people may come to understand and care for one another across borders.
It can't be!
in culturally conservative jordan mobile application features like track my ride reassure families that female members will feel safer a woman s sole mode of transport was through a family member until the introduction of uber and careem apps.
while she remains in detention allow ebtisam al saegh unhindered access to medical care as well as proper meetings with her family and lawyer and.
morocco hijab as a choice global voices.
Why do you like wearing hats so much?
in contrast to the contentiousness of breastfeeding in many western countries most recently in the united kingdom kurdish media outlets have largely welcomed this peshmerga woman breastfeeding her child celebrating how the photograph captures her dual roles as a warrior and a nurturer.
I usually walk.
palestinian rebellious arab girl announced that she will not be blogging for a while i don t know when i will come back she adds.
I am from Egypt.
Practice makes perfect.
on january the government of rio released a note announcing that the contract with maracana s a has been changed in order not to allow the demolition of the building of the museum of the indian.
May I borrow this book?
the tenge note worth wikimedia commons.
this is not to say that things are perfect in countries where the protection lasts for the lifetime of the author plus only years this duration is already too long and practically means that works created by others during our lifetime is not likely to join the public domain except after we die copyright laws in the arab world provide exceptions that allow users in certain circumstances to copy and utilise works without the permission of the author but no arab country has a fair use exception and the existing exceptions are limited and do not satisfy the needs of the users of creative works on the internet.
de birahan blog contextualized the wide ranging human right abuse in the country by giving a detailed perspective.
so far the only non speculative evidence is the report of one eyewitness to the crash a boatman from paraty who says he saw smoke coming from the wing of the plane as it fell from the sky.
iran dear mr president fix the internet global voices.
Can I buy you another drink?
I hope you aren't too disappointed.
Please turn off the television.
I can see that you are working.
She has a son and a daughter.
Mary likes watching TV.
latin america s low lands.
iran internet senior officers will be trained to counter internet activism global voices advox.
iraqpundit discusses us presidential hopeful barack obama s assessment of the situation in iraq in this post.
Tom got on the wrong train.
jordan.
japan how dangerous is low level radiation global voices.
This is extremely hard.
That's my dictionary.
Japan is in the eastern part of Asia.
It's cold this morning.
palestine youtube removes gaza massacre video global voices.
this thing is really taking off since catherine launched the global mom meme i have found about posts from moms in or from different countries moms in at least a half dozen other countries have already been tagged and a korean american mom group blog called kimchi mamas has put the call out for korean bloggers to participate.
You don't need to worry about me.
india meter down with a cab driver global voices.
Tom looks happy.
He was killed with a sword.
tajikistan afghanistan bridging two nations global voices.
short documentary cabo verde by felix de rosen with footage from sao vicente praia and santo antao music by cordas do sol.
monks at the silver pagoda in phnom penh photo by tetard rene.
Let's ponder that for a moment.
one of the films is chok song chun double luck which is thailand s first feature silent film produced in only seconds of the film have remained featuring a fight scene and car chase.
My children really like animals.
this post is part of our special coverage syria protests.
Come on. Let's get out of here.
the news wasn t free of controversy according to some versions this is not a new finding at all one website called archaeology of peru claimed photos taken in of the place show the paintings.
Do it now.
lebanon websites of political parties global voices.
an animated video explains the powers of the african court on human and peoples rights global voices.
I have a runny nose.
traditional dishes made by anna boiko for the dish christmas eve dinner photo by olya suprun used with permission.
This is my father's house.
the french archives nationales de outre mer centre for overseas archives has digitized thousands of photos in its collection including historic documents related to french indochina we searched the digital library and found rare images of cambodia in the s and s.
as in my parents description to eid magic lantern rope swing and ice cream and juice vendors.
photo pixabay public domain.
morocco the henna experience global voices.
The policeman arrested him for drunken driving.
dohan dohanalsalem january.
I like movies.
Tom told me he wasn't sick anymore.
I have to get up anyways.
It is Saturday.
Do you have these shoes in my size?
Don't use my pen.
I'm looking forward to seeing Tom.
It is a very popular destination for tourists.
I'm really hungry.
satellite imagery of the fires on october source http fires kosmosnimki ru.
That is why he got angry.
My friend doesn't play tennis.
Leave the rest to me.
she also quips.
last saturday may young people from several education institutions called for a protest that started at the heart of mexico city the zocalo and marched to the emblematic independence angel with the objective to inform all mexicans and the world about the media bias seen at this election.
Where did you go?
One drop of the poison is enough to kill 160 people.
i recommend our doctors twitter beginners tolubaiev oxanalivshits drmedvedev ihorkyrpa sokolovmd ff sledui.
Why are you acting this way?
the loudspeakers are calling on people in the higher floors to come down the sound of ambulance sirens gets louder suddenly we hear a volley of bullets my friend asks can those bullets hit the plane he answers his own question no my dear those are the bullets of oppression i envy the militant who feels oppressed.
google ceo eric schmidt visited north korea last month and his daughter shared in her blog what the delegation saw in the hermit kingdom some of highlights from the blog.
afghanistan women s voices raised to poetry global voices.
mexico yosoy the beginning of the mexican spring global voices.
Tom says that he's very busy.
there is no shame in fear confronting surveillance in post revolution egypt global voices advox.
She took her own life.
her killers bludgeoned her with rifle blows and tossed her into the waters of a canal.
Remember what happened last year.
nepal s parliament has elected mr sushil koirala the president of the party nepali congress as the new nepali prime minister nepali diaspora blogger indra congratulates the new prime minister and thinks that the gift mr koirala has for empowering others with his humility and sincerity will go a long way.
What'll you be doing over the weekend?
The students learned this poem by heart.
I'm looking forward to spending time with my family.
I have lived here a little over 60 years.
the central reserve bank of peru released on may the thirteenth collectible coin part of the numismatic series wealth and pride of peru the coin has an image of the crossed hands from the temple of kotosh located in the department of huanuco.
That meat is chicken.
I looked Tom in the eyes and told him the truth.
Watch out, the man has a gun.
jordan fairoz in concert global voices.
lebanon stuck in beirut global voices.
We're listening.
I'm sure Tom is planning to do that.
How much did the tickets cost you?
a look at the us based institute for health metrics and evaluation s data on leading causes of death in tanzania from to shows that hiv aids was responsible for of all deaths in the country in while cirrhosis and other liver conditions caused by hepatitis b and c accounted for about of all deaths in the same period.
this solution will give the president much more power and basically overthrows the taif agreement something that march was considering recently while march has always vehemently opposed any change to taif now however march is fully behind the proposal of the arab league possibly because they got the candidate it wanted namely general michel suleiman they must feel confident he is on their side.
I don't know whether he'll come by train or by car.
i discovered this blog bg by chance the title read hepatitis minded thoughts of a contaminated and it was moving to get that close to someone s everyday fight with hepatitis c this awful and insidious illness the words were simple yet sharp and touching bg.
the video which features many prominent lebanese personalities such as director zeina daccache and tv host fouad yammine as well as cynthia karam bruno tabbal carole abboud bechara atallah rabih salloum medea azouri jana younes christine choueiri natacha choufani yvonne el hachem pauline haddad elie youssef and andre nacouzi calls for lebanon to respect the universal declaration of human rights and to not discriminate against those who are different.
We rose from our seats when the national anthem was played.
Do you mean me?
literature in the spanish language during colonial times quickly began its particular development literature from the time of the conquest is mostly in the form of verse and romances poking fun especially at those who governed and those around them while that from the colonial period comprises texts urging liberty and inciting revolution.
a young boy looks towards the picture of ahmed shah masoud a hero to many in afghanistan who fought against the soviets and the taliban masoud was assassinated in just before the attacks on the us photo by aaquib khan.
this however does not justify the blatant lack of interest from international media outlets al jazeera for instance played a prominent role in reporting the uprisings in several arab countries but netizens say it seems to ignore the events currently unfolding in sudan.
We enjoyed swimming in the river.
here is a video film in youtube showing young iranians gathering under a bridge in isfahan every afternoon to sing.
so many of our stories are centered on online social movements and citizens mobilizing to improve their societies we want to tell this news in a way that inspires hope rather than falling back on the more negative framing of regular mainstream news media.
Take a look at this report.
according to witnesses the year old who was sentenced to lashes and years in jail last year was reportedly lashed times today outside a mosque in jeddah after friday prayers he will continue to be flogged every week until his punishment is met.
photo by flickr user turinboy cc by.
It's impossible.
I study Korean.
mena netizen report porn edition global voices advox.
I'm at home.
libya.
Come tomorrow.
Let's just be friends.
Please shut the door.
hassan has long promoted democratic values protections for human rights and peace in bahrain in he played an active role in the first bahraini dialogue held in manama a blogger and author for global voices online hassan often covered human rights and politics in bahrain on his blog safybh hassan stopped blogging on april.
besides showing people dancing with a happy feeling the video also exposes other not so happy current affairs in the city such as the high cost of living the racism problem thievery and violence as well as the construction works for the world cup and olympics.
oudom.
shadi abou zeid who had previously worked as a producer for a well known satirical show featuring a chatty puppet character named abla fahita was also arrested for spreading false information on facebook about the economic and political states of the country with the intention to undermine trust in the egyptian state he is currently in custody as part of a day detention and is awaiting formal charges.
He must be homesick.
dr abdulaziz suliman al khereiji human right activist detained in february.
The clock is above the fireplace.
egyptian american columnist mona eltahawy has once again sparked controversy with an article in foreign policy magazine on april entitled why do they hate us about discrimination against women in the middle east eltahawy argues that arab societies are fundamentally misogynistic and that endless abuses against women fueled by a toxic mix of culture and religion take place.
I think that you're doing the right thing.
The cake is still in the oven.
It's my brother's.
The king crushed his enemies.
i m at sheremetyevo international airport in moscow on my way back to vladivostok and what s before me but a caviar vending machine while it s sold out today there is one super expensive kind worth rubles which based on today s exchange rate is about yen about us while i d never feed it to a cat i wonder if anyone ever buys such luxury goods here.
adamakary pm ganzouri said violence will not be used on peaceful protesters just ten minutes ago egypt.
in a music video refugees say thanks to brazil for welcoming them global voices.
the regulation of real name registration for micro blogging platform has extended from beijing to guangzhou and shenzhen according to local report zh the real name registration requirement is started today december major micro blogging platforms including tencents jinyang dayoo shenzhen news web oe digu and fanfou have to authenticate new users identity before granting them authority to create post.
I'd like to introduce some friends of mine.
what s personal when you re syrian global voices.
bruce gagnon who has been in the frontline of the jeju protest explains the significance of international involvement in his blog.
lebanon recorded the greatest number of car accidents to date casualties and more than injuries reports liliane.
last year kunming china took part in no car day now the southwestern chinese city has gone above and beyond by instituting a no car day every month.
cuba a society without trees global voices.
syria untold will be partnering with global voices online syria untold posts will be edited by global voices editors and translated by volunteer translators as part of gv s interest in highlighting citizen voices and grassroots initiatives.
in december global voices reported a video that purportedly showed a similar incident of torture where private company s officers used machetes to injure diamond diggers this video was first released by marques on maka angola.
according to an announcement on march these services include yahoo messanger google talk skype non fee based acrobat reader flashplayer java and googlechrome firefox and internet explorer.
university students protest on may against media manipulation photo by hector aiza ramirez under demotix copyright.
the idea is to represent colombia through its people because ethnic diversity in colombia is incredible it is a mixture of amerindians spanish and african descendants and that s what we want to show the world maurent explains.
Did you think about it?
We miss you so much.
In Venice, there are always lots of tourists.
more than syrians have been killed so far not to mention the thousands of people who have gone missing in the conflict in violence across syria according to syrian observatory for human rights the breakdown in this tragedy is as follows.
You look busy.
women gather reeds in iraq s southern marshlands most people have added outboard motors to the traditional boats but there are few other conveniences here most are without electricity and there are few schools or clinics credit jane arraf.
global voices and the power of we global voices.
brazil was at the center of the portuguese driven transatlantic slave trade both before and after brazilian independence in bahia where the portuguese settlers first landed in received alone more than million slaves who came primarily from west central africa and the bight of benin.
madam if you invited every grandmother mother daughter sister girlfriend fiancee or friend to not being a woman for one day just one if you all decided to go on strike against our falsely macho society i think that not only would you be able to vote for your rights but you can even lead our poor lebanon towards save shores.
brazil footage of violent removal of homeless by sao paulo police global voices.
I met her on my way to school.
young leaders from sweden and middle east in dialogue global voices.
cyriac gbogou reports that fr afripedia a project spearheaded by wikimedia france l institut francais l agence universitaire de la francophonie and kiwix strives to promote digital development by giving offline access to wikimedia projects including wikipedia and providing digital training to young people in francophone africa.
in the first episode of the series we meet transplanted american surfer autumn who visited japan and decided to stay in sendai after the earthquake she teamed up with other local surfers and fishermen to try and figure out how to rebuild lives through work on their beaches and communities.
I'll never forget that feeling.
I don't drink alcohol.
Tom wiped the table.
the song mr fedotov is dancing to livin la vida loca performed by ricky martin is not banned in the russian federation mr fedotov hasn t demonstrated any calls or other efforts to incite ethnic or class tension.
You don't smoke, do you?
The train leaves in ten minutes.
as much as the internet is challenging old media models only a few organizations are innovating in the realm of international news in the way that we are we are very happy to try working together more closely in the months ahead.
This is the place where the incident took place.
on november the egyptian public prosecutor announced porn sites will be blocked indeed a court order was issued in allowing technical measures to be taken to block online content deemed pornographic many have raised concerns highlighting that banning any given online content is a route to generalized censorship the egyptian telecommunication regulatory authority has however issued a much more nuanced statement which jeopardizes the prosecutor s move in favour of censorship.
happy birthday global voices here s to many more decades.
the netizen report offers an international snapshot of challenges victories and emerging trends in internet rights around the world.
Whose is this?
mauritania.
Could you give me a lift to the train station?
we ll survive the blocks the important thing is that they didn t cooperate with our authorities and carry out their requirements and we will figure out how to get around the block.
You'll be busy tomorrow, won't you?
for me it s a double edged sword my husband claims that he s been stopped by the police more times in the last eight years since we ve been in a relationship than ever before in his years i credit this to one reason only me despite this i d like to make it clear if the police detain a person of color it s not due to racism but because of a concrete reason.
korea.
photo of mural artwork by local artist jesus delgado burgos from campamento contra la junta s public facebook page used with permission.
jordan internet cafes global voices.
Do you study English?
congratulating the new prime minister of nepal global voices.
latin american congress of living cultures global voices.
it is an honor to play the cajon especially when i play outside i really like the idea of this congregation of people.
stay tuned for the launch of the summit website and details on venues registration programming and more and do save the date.
We need a new truck.
jordan let it snow global voices.
Tom must be having fun.
What choice did I have?
I like your plan.
My mother plays the piano well.
She finished reading the letter.
He seems to have told a lie.
the ipcc s estimate of a carbon budget found that about half of the carbon that we can emit and stay within c has already been released into the atmosphere this is crucial because for the first time it gives a clear idea of what we can safely do in producing further emissions on current trends we would use up the remaining budget in about three decades.
It is a lot of fun to drive a car.
while the lunch is typically prepared by full time staff in a large kitchen either in the school or at a central facility that serves the entire school district it s the students who are responsible for serving lunch for their classmates.
writing for non profit news site grados puerto rican queer activist yoryie irizarry explained why the pain of these deaths is felt so strongly among the lgbtq community.
How is your dad?
intlxpatr an expatriate living in kuwait reports that an islamic mp has requested parliament to ban female ministers not wearing the islamic headscarf the hijab from entering parliament.
Tom doesn't hate you, Mary.
mr arvanitis is he going to resign now.
He'll be there in ten minutes.
tiger caught and killed in a trap photo from the new york public library digital collections.
You were talking in your sleep last night.
She's not here.
I can't concentrate while you're here.
photo of kuwait city skyline by cajetan barretto cc by nc sa.
national policy.
They're going to have a lot more questions than we do.
Your daughters have turned into women.
Everyone went there, didn't they?
the sun festival or inti raymi comes from the incas and is celebrated in communities of this descent the blog cometa magico magic comment explains the tradition.
He raised his hand.
guinee solidarite has main branches strasbourg marseille that has been financing a major rehabilitation center for the disabled in mamou paris and conakry.
Tom's speech was excellent.
Tom drove the car.
there was one time during the general elections when i was in my official police uniform when a man came up to me and said pardon ma am but are you a police officer i burst out laughing and told him that no actually this was a costume i bought just down the street.
I don't want to see him at all.
according to the internet rights watchdog roskomsvoboda russian censors have already blocked more than two dozen ip addresses linked to the domains and services of tencent the maker of wechat.
Our house was robbed while we were away.
moroccan students call for a reform of the education system photo used with kindly permission from hassan ouazzani.
with elections approaching in may many in lebanon are now wondering whether lebanese politics is on the brink of something new or whether the situation will despite everything largely remain unchanged.
because leaders from around the world are gathering and discussing various issues.
If you want to succeed in life, work hard.
I can't stand his arrogance.
I'm sad.
My mom doesn't speak English very well.
There has been an accident at the worksite.
Ladies first.
Turn off the light, please.
would it not have been more reassuring if it was made clear that negligence of duty by the police would not be repeated or excused.
Where did he go?
soheil arabi was sentenced to death for insulting the prophet mohammad on the facebook the revolutionary guards arrested soheil arabi on november iranian twitter user velgard tweeted below about this explaining that arabi is only a year old iranian who is not a political activist but merely one of us several bloggers and facebook users were arrested in last twelve months.
Why is he angry about something like that?
c totalitarianism is an underestimation.
May I play the piano?
the congress has approved billions of dollars of us taxpayers money to fund these sectarian militias who are directly responsible of the ethnic and sectarian cleansing that has been taking place in iraq during the last years.
Well, it's obvious now.
kenya is also home to the ushahidi platform a crowd sourcing open source crisis mapping solution that has been deployed worldwide in several crisis situations such as the earthquake in haiti and the tsunami in japan.
just hours after the release of yara shams daughter of syrian activist and lawyer michel shammas from prison many congratulation messages were posted on his facebook wall activists in syria await the release of all political and intellectual prisoners.
It's too dangerous for you to stay here.
the national assembly in phnom penh photo by lebailly.
the ukrainian section of the worldwide competition received over photos depicting over natural heritage subjects by participants during the month of may about a thousand of these pictures are already used to illustrate wikipedia articles in different languages.
He finally decided to get married.
She asked me for help.
work closely with technical staff to identify technical solutions and challenges to integrate or link a translation exchange into existing global voices initiatives.
where does state control stop in the case of the gulf monarchies we might need a bit of time to answer such a question the cables show that state hand can reach even to your personal and family life this cable shows how a syrian citizen whose sister is married to a bahraini judge had a dispute during a phone call with his sister which led him to be questioned by the saudi intelligence until he signed a paper saying the dispute was resolved.
Who died?
daraa in turn saw its largest protests to date protesters chanted a traitor attacks his own people.
Do you think so?
Maybe Tom has something to hide.
I wish you'd told me before.
brazilian investment fifa profit photos were shared on facebook and twitter under the hashtag projetacodacopa.
I was very thirsty and I wanted to drink something cold.
but what do its users think about the metro and metrobus in mexico city what is the perception of the real situation in this regard the citizen portal transeunte es reports.
sierra leone agrofuels versus food security global voices.
We need to water the flowers.
I'm sure you're right.
I give you five minutes to resolve this issue.
You'd better go to see your family doctor at once.
What's for dinner?
lately iqbal ahmad oruzgani a photographer from afghanistan has also begun posting photos under the hashtag to show afghanistan from a different perspective.
Tom is a nice man.
I wake up very early.
The card you drew was a red, wasn't it?
why don t poles like russians.
lima peru juan arellano.
Tom won.
however the country s catholic church said they consider the nomination as contrary to the constitution.
Tom won't change his opinion.
Speech is silver, silence is gold.
Have you done all your homework?
We still have ten miles to go.
Are you really a princess?
the campaign has already produced video testimonies below is the story of trika who travelled from sebha to tripoli.
iranian blogger andisheh writes that iranian national television are trying to blame anti revolutionaries for killing neda the blogger adds that if anybody had any doubts that iranian television lies these doubts can now be put to rest.
moreover the gas prices are relatively high compared with neighboring countries with prices reaching usd per litre in jordan while it is only usd per litre in neighboring saudi arabia.
rebecca mackinnon one of global voices founders participated in the working group and writes in rconversation.
My mother is making a cake for my father.
This word comes from Greek.
a protestor carries a sign which reads ar name mohammed mursi profession mohammed hosni photograph from the we are all april facebook group.
I hated school.
The only sound to be heard was the ticking of the clock.
Some snakes are poisonous.
She can speak three languages.
access has published an article on the need for global surveillance reform.
during the first days of september many venezuelan internet users reported having difficulties accessing google services through the state run internet service provider cantv the largest telecommunications company in venezuela the service seemed to be working again by mid september but the conversation revealed the many ways online users are deprived of information and communication online.
Kuala Lumpur is worth visiting.
several arab and iraqi bloggers had sent a video message that was shared during the lectures here is a short clip of the conference uploaded by ali arafa.
for more info and to follow the project s progress visit the project s blog and or follow the twitter hashtag bdsp better daily star project.
May I come in?
blogdai on the death of edmund hillary as climbing the everest is no longer the adventurous mission it once was.
occupy frankfurt in front of ecb photo shared by roarmag org copyleft.
iran sugar cane workers were paid finally global voices.
I walk to school.
Tom lost his job.
the stockholm internet forum will take place october.
She writes to me once a month.
No one encouraged her.
china motor powered breakfast crepes global voices.
a boat in myitsone photo nan lwin hnin pwint the irrawaddy.
image from ostagram ru.
Tom spent most days begging for money in front of tourist attractions.
and draw until i die eight questions for the illustrator lorraine rodriguez global voices.
milton ramirez es is one of the first latin american collaborators for global voices and global voices en espanol es a bit reluctant to be interviewed he finally agreed to this little chat where he tells us about his diverse activities in which we can always find a link to his native land of ecuador and technology.
cuba the per cent global voices.
finally user lordarchibaldhartley gathers a number of artistic and cultural images that have served as the inspiration for much of the art made in mexico today.
Do you promise?
global voices is one of the most multilingual online communities in the world our lingua project where people from around the world volunteer to translate global voices content into different languages has experienced astounding growth since it began years ago we now have over translations posted in a slew of different languages some of which you ve probably never even heard of as a developer this growth was almost difficult to believe and presented many challenges but when you re in the business of spreading citizen media as far and wide as possible growth like that is an amazing problem to have.
like many other countries and regions around the world japan enjoys distinct seasons throughout the year.
what about jenan what does she like she confesses.
all in all snow brings joy and happiness to the people of jordan and hope that the upcoming cold fronts would bring more snow to the lower areas in amman which fall below m above sea level.
forestry deforestation transport traffic emissions.
Come with me.
They gave him a chance to escape.
They won't intervene.
Since you're here, we might as well begin.
the media coverage of recent protests in sudan was confined to articles in al arabiya and al jazeera including some snippets on al jazeera s english channel other news outlets to cover the protests include cnn the malaysian news outlet the star the new york times yahoo news abc news and the chicago tribune nonetheless this has not brought enough attention to the issues on the ground as most of these news outlets don t have much impact in the region say netizens.
This bus will take you to the airport.
u s papal visit the world reacts global voices.
What are you doing, Dad?
She finally found her missing keys.
he says he s still holding out hope that korean officials will reconsider his asylum request and then he could bring his parents here.
i want internet by ramy raoof on flickr cc by.
stay anonymous online.
cuba giving thanks cuban style global voices.
I'm not thin.
I'm not in the best of shape.
the recent internet outage is not helping either and forzaq is pointing fingers at who is to blame for it and proclaims.
Would you like to sell your car?
I have never seen a red refrigerator.
in these times of globalisation and world trade the challenge of how to protect the environment while ensuring increased economic growth appears to be a problem facing many countries in this article we offer glimpses of this first in ghana through the post sweet n sour and in china in the post what china can learn from france.
You may borrow this book as long as you keep it clean.
My mother is making my father a cake.
I'm taking a walk in a park.
the second video features the women of minya day by day project led by nevine fahem who has been working with young women from the rural regions of the el minya governorate.
You're Tom's friend, aren't you?
on twitter users celebrated this new phase of the canal which has shortened distances in the american continent some talked about the next project whatever that may be.
police strike back.
economy should be the priority for the revolutionaries because it is the safety valve which will guarantee the continuation of the revolution and the cleansing of egypt from corruption.
russia muslims the majority in global voices.
this is how anna boiko s granddaughter olya suprun starts uk her blog called the story of anna boiko s life online olya shares her grandmother s memories including stories from the life of their family and other residents of yaglush.
I hope war doesn't break out.
user wuyue sanren thought zh the move is a trick to get rid of the ministry s enormous debt.
I studied in Boston from 2003 to 2007.
there has been much discussion over the proper way to pronounce and even transliterate the current iranian president s last name writes nouri from algeria who shares his thoughts on how best to write mahmood ahmadinejad s name.
shayegan used to write in the blog gameron where the tagline description says that most of the posts are satirical and nothing is too sacred to be criticized.
the wikimedia foundation and the saudi telecom company stc have concluded a partnership aiming at offering wikipedia free of data charges on mobile devices to stc customers in saudi arabia bahrain and kuwait.
Who am I?
Tom said that you need to go.
It's Saturday.
You like English, don't you?
on social media the response to the wechat block ranged from humorous levity to solidarity.
She hopes to become a designer.
local media informed es that thousand people were due to join coca chewing day referred to in bolivia as acullicu or pijcheo.
fasokan in mali reports on the creation of an app to help spell check texts in bambara fr.
We all hope that this cease-fire will make for world peace.
zarehbin says fa the scene where different delegates left the conference shows how much we are hated in the world what a poor nation we are that this bum ahmadinejad is our president while a regime repressed bahai s and others in iran how can support palestanians rights.
jailed syrian developer moved to undisclosed location.
scores of indonesians gather in central jakarta the country s capital to light candles in protest to the israeli airstrikes in gaza strip indonesia is the world s most populous muslim majority nation.
in an extremely harsh environment creativity will gradually die the ambiguity and polysemy of words mean it could easily be twisted as evidence of crimes because creativity is equivalent to suicide no one is devoted to it words have degraded to become standardized criticisms and judgments.
Democracy is the worst form of government, except all the others that have been tried.
the website we know what you re doing which collects public social media updates about drug use hangovers and contempt towards employers highlights the potential risks of users not realizing how their public data can be aggregated.
"Thank you." "You're welcome."
below is a selection of discussions about the southern metropolis report zh on the skyscraper story from sina weibo comment thread zh.
iraq sewerage problems global voices.
posting a plea on qatar living the samaritan named speed urged other members to gather blankets sheets mattresses clothes shoes and food items his call was immediately answered with pledges of help.
asad buda an afghan writer wrote fa.
latvia riga is the only candidate that is making progress at the same speed in this country there is an organized mass campaign with the help of many media outlets.
It wasn't the first time they had done it.
Come forward.
in the government announced it had achieved an early leprosy elimination target by reducing the incidence of the disease to less than one in every people.
germany improve reporting on disabled people global voices.
facing that situation the currency reform replaced the peso with the sol that would be coined with silver as well as with gold.
Tom tried not to look disappointed.
for syrian university students institute of international education an education crisis in syria how you can help.
medigo a health specialized platform that connects patients and physicians all over the world has completed a comparative global study on life expectancy.
like in neighbouring countries activists are resorting to the internet and social networking sites such as facebook to keep the world abreast with their struggles back home.
We are going downtown to eat pizza.
ultimately maalouf says he wanted to use the story of alice in wonderland to make a point about the right to express yourself and in a world after the charlie hebdo slayings it s even more important he says.
during the conference the overbearing security presence made many people uncomfortable algerian officials attempted to control discussions by planting people in the audience who were tasked with making comments that followed conspicuously similar arguments a state should monitor its citizens because it protects them the way that parents do their children this feeble strategy quickly became obvious and repetitive.
Maryam is well behaved.
blogging isn t what it used to be but there s still loads of content made by bloggers that finds its way onto the internet today in fact tools like medium have revitalized blogging even as this form of writing has lost its novelty across the world another thing the internet seems to have lost is the tradition of celebrating blog day which technically occurs every august.
I want a guitar.
may scaff.
the photo above is by twitter.
a neighbourhood with pokemon in tabriz kabood mosque.
What are you staring at?
i know that i am fortunate enough that when i do die i will be remembered by friends and loved ones maybe my blog and an online presence might even gather some thoughts by people around the world that is the beauty of the internet and even that is out of reach to too many.
I fell asleep before my father came home.
You have many books.
How did you come to know each other?
all women receive attention on moroccan streets but i doubt a moroccan woman is told in syrupy slick english that she is very niiiiiice or that he likes your size.
oh have you heard about the blast a real terrorist act.
kuthodaw temple mandalay myanmar.
Watch the rear. I'll watch the front.
nat taschetti garcia angie admits ignorance and asks.
I gave him all the money I had.
It's very big.
the minister believes that there are some core activists who are mobilising the people against the islamic regime and it is important for the government to find and stop them he argued that those activists try to damage islamic values and regime s ideologies by misguiding the people.
He is not available.
When I last saw him, he was wearing a blue shirt and white slacks.
That's pretty normal.
but it s not just about encouraging votes several nominated bloggers have posted thanks or given speeches.
Please remove your shoes before entering the house.
runet echo has applied uspensky s methodology to groups across the world in order to uncover russian internet users most common stereotypes about foreigners the list below is far from complete but it features the most popular searches on the runet when it comes to foreigners unlike uspensky s study we have listed yandex s top three searches for each group.
We have been to Tokyo many times.
She looks as if she were drunk.
Thank you for your kindness.
I brush my teeth twice a day.
republished from free press unlimited.
Tom would want me to say that.
jordan s civil service bureau issues annual reports on the specializations needed most in the job market and what sectors of the market have reached full employment the agency also sends advice to the ministry of higher education as to what majors are not needed in the market and thus should be shut down and what majors should accept lower student numbers.
mechanical failures and the constant delays in service on lines a and b of the transportation system stc the metro every day cause more unrest among thousands of passengers who must sometimes wait or minutes to catch a train at transfer stations during rush hour all because of a lack of maintenance and an insufficient number of trains in service.
leon j suseran of the guyana chronicle blog wishes he could have been there.
I was born in Kyoto in 1980.
the ainu talking dictionary goes beyond kayano s series of ainu japanese print dictionaries the talking dictionary is part of research project documentation of the saru dialect of ainu by anna bugaeva a phd assistant professor of linguistics at the waseda institute for advanced study wias waseda university in tokyo japan.
bahrain.
alloco sliced and fried plantains accompanied here by fried fish via wikimedia commons.
I wanted to show them my appreciation.
in the same way ivan uses his blog to open access to a musical piece from the epoch placed on youtube by denesago the song was composed by the spaniard juan de araujo who was confirmed as one of the most important musicians of the colonial epoch in what is now bolivia the video images show something of baroque architecture and painting from bolivia ecuador and peru.
djerbafr tweets fr.
by observing wondering and reacting i learned that the people i was observing were all very different from one another while this world rich in differences was flourishing and expanding my personal identity was diminishing i was no longer seen as me a person from the city of barquisimeto but instead as a person from venezuela i even fell into a category that was as new as it was incomprehensible i was a latina the label that is supposed to define someone from tierra del fuego as being no different from someone from the city of juarez in mexico.
I'm not trying to deprive you of your rights.
What time will you leave?
a ruin pub in budapest photo courtesy of alternative budapest.
there were protests throughout as well and they escalated from being a way of demonstrating dissatisfaction with the situation to some even threatening to burn their taxis.
I've come to like the picture more than ever.
Read it once more, please.
I haven't eaten anything for days.
Where's my father?
She's stupid, but honest.
the whole article has been shared many times in social networks kallol also shares bn his frustrations and anger.
I have to come on Monday.
yemeni noon arabia shares this photograph taken by ameen alghaberi of a child worker in yemen on twitter.
I heard everything clearly.
It makes me so happy.
thank you.
everettrummage no one i knew in belgium thought much of the king but consensus was his son is an even bigger idiot.
love letter to jailed syrian palestinian bassel khartabil february.
relatively light sentences for sex offenders over the years have enraged the south korean public and the law authorizing chemical castration is believed to have been implemented to meet public demands for stronger law enforcement.
iranian blogger machin hesab asks fa why they shot him in the head.
Hope is not a strategy.
le supplice du pal adds fr.
global voices partners with ashoka on citizen media competition global voices.
aktar reported on the increasingly vocal movement for recognition of genocidal crimes within turkish society every major publishing house in turkey has published at least one book on the armenian genocide in turkish and the g word is becoming more acceptable in academic circles some descendants of the armenians who had to convert to islam to save their lives the so called islamized armenians or hidden armenians have re converted to christianity while other armenian muslims have decided to remain muslim all the while reclaiming their armenianity the first public commemoration of the genocide was held in taksim suqare in and more importantly citizens in at least turkish towns are planning on commemorating the genocide this friday.
she further adds.
brazilian twitter user transeunte transeunte bsb pt tweeted about his desire to get out of his comfort zone.
a school in hanoi vietnam in see the bomb shelters near the end of the video.
the road is long but the sidewalk blooms with hope.
He is just now speaking with her.
It seems interesting to me.
Tom needs a good lawyer.
privacy.
She wants to buy a present for her boyfriend.
on july bahrain handed over kuwaiti citizen yousef shamlan al essa to his country al essa stands accused of spreading false news for taking part in conversations hosted by a whatsapp group called fontas in the conversations the group accused judges at the constitutional court of receiving bribes.
egypt sandmonkey back global voices.
however the colombian photojournalist luis acosta has had the fortitude to face the farc in another way acosta turned these four letters into the title of the photo that won one of the three awards of excellence in the general news category of the pictures of the year competition held by the donald w reynolds journalism institute of the university of missouri.
according to fa schrr blog soheil asefi blogger and journalist who had been in jail since august is out of prison now he used to work with rooz online journal.
adammakary the military police have taken tahrir and qasr el aini they ve got it sealed from every rooftop and every road entrance painful images.
No one ate the cake.
on june egypt s parliament approved a cybercrime law that will dictate what is and is not permissible in the realms of online censorship data privacy hacking fraud and messages that authorities fear are spreading terrorist and extremist ideologies.
human rights watch issued on may a report entitled they burned my heart documenting war crimes in idlib province during un envoy kofi annan s peace negotiations plan.
bribr ru app store facebook is a newly launched iphone ipad app that allows anonymous users in russia to submit the locations and the amounts of the bribes they pay later it will be possible to report on the bribes taken as well.
My father made me wash the car.
Laughter is the best medicine.
over the course of two months the community site twitter colombia es analyzed million tweets from users in the country as way to take a snapshot of the use of this microblogging tool the result was a set of statistics about the average twitterer in colombia es.
I can't think of a suitable example.
You made the same mistake.
I'll buy him a pencil.
She screamed for help.
Never tell a lie!
in the past i ve had to identify myself along with my husband before the police with him they just take a quick glance at his badge and id and they re done when they get to me however they snatch my badge from my hand examine it carefully this way and that peering at it as if it were an alien.
iranian blogger freedomseeker fa explains the rumours.
thought clouds the digital bender shares those photographs from amman jordan in the rain.
iraq debunking muqtada al sadr global voices.
My brother is an idiot.
What time did he say he'd come?
an animal right activist locked himself in an animal cage outside council of agriculture against the killing of stray dogs and cats to prevent the spread of rabies he advocates for vaccination photo from facebook.
Should we go by car or by taxi?
we recommend the chapter about open source software in egypt in access to knowledge in egypt to the egyptian officials or any one interested in the pragmatic values of open source software for developing countries.
Many people pushed their way toward the rear exit.
check out artist omar banuchi s blog on tumblr a small and modest blog of images.
She is in the bathroom.
angola armament compared with brazil and israel global voices.
asia.
Don't interrupt our conversation.
This question is not easy.
What's up?
Leave me alone!
There are no clean plates.
bye bye.
We went to the museum last week.
mehdi yahyanejad.
this post was written by khalid ibrahim executive director of the gulf center for human rights an independent non profit organisation that promotes freedom of expression association and peaceful assembly in the gulf region and its neighbouring countries.
sharifkouddous army soldiers just came into apartment we are at and took cameras from us.
twitter users quickly reacted to the news some celebrate the announcement like vanesa casanova vanecasan es.
Whose pen is this?
while it s up to you to choose your favorites bloggers are already pushing hard for theirs one such blogger is final cut producer who recommends voting for alive in baghdad a video blog about daily life in iraq nominated to the best video blog.
shrestha isn t the only one documenting nepal s butterflies a british national colin smith spent more than years studying butterflies in nepal he traveled to districts collecting butterflies and wrote the book illustrated checklist of nepal s butterflies.
Does this remind you of anybody?
I am a boy.
lebanon upcoming presidential elections global voices.
fauna from chinasmack translated chinese netizens reactions to a set of photos that show india s poor and homeless.
a popular and well respected university professor and blogger pr mohamed drissi bakhakhat decided to stop blogging out of fear for his safety after what happened to fuad mourtada writes a moro in america.
iraq s marshlands nearly destroyed under saddam are coming back global voices.
martial law may be directed against the maute group but it led to the mass evacuation of marawi residents to nearby towns thousands of families have fled their homes in order to avoid getting caught in the crossfire.
rv the last question would certainly be about your hopes and wishes for the project for the coming near future.
Practicing yoga makes the body flexible and healthy.
Why do these things happen to me?
Call a doctor immediately.
najda now international e v.
That noise was deafing.
the project asks individuals to contribute videos of themselves speaking in their own language be it german urdu swahili or any other and is mostly organised through its youtube account.
I'll bring one more towel.
an anti nuclear symbol designed for tao indigenous people in orchid island taiwan anti nuclear campaign t shirt and products available at ciongzo com.
a few glimpses of africa through citizen media videos from bob winners to storytellers documentaries on artists nigeria s nollywood movie industry and more.
The reason is that I want to be an English teacher.
in this video they make a fake interview with juan nose vainas juan i don t know stuff where he shows the results of the treatment consisting of training his students in catcalls fighting for men oggling men and walking in high heels for women and getting lucky with the opposite sex.
There are a lot of things you don't know about my personality.
three friends and i travelled to jordan on the first week of november to work as volunteers supporting syrian refugees and to witness first hand the conditions in which they live.
humans of colombia and humans of bogota.
atena farghadani with her mother saedeh zeynali image facebook.
brazil s chamber of deputies approved the marco civil in march photo shared by carolina rossini via twitter.
i m praying for god to forgive us because we could not hear enough zouhair bouazizi and all the martyrs of all places and of all times tribute to zouhair yahyaoui alias ettounis of tunezine.
It isn't mine.
thecarol adds.
a life in danger.
china has decided to dismantle its powerful but indebted railways ministry in a bid to boost government efficiency and tackle corruption a move that some chinese web users worry could mean higher ticket prices on the horizon.
I'll stay here until you return.
The new plan worked well.
please watch the official meeting website arabloggers org and follow hashtag ab on twitter for updates reports and insights from amman more to come very soon.
Who's the boy swimming over there?
mannequins wear elegant wedding dresses standard wedding dresses cost from afghani to afghani lavish wedding halls have mushroomed across kabul in the last few years photo by aaquib khan.
If I were to tell you the truth, you would be surprised.
as we approach the first anniversary of the start of the youth based pro democracy movement february activists are calling for a nationwide demonstration anartiviste posted this video on youtube to convey the movement s message.
Now that I am here, you don't have to worry.
those in case you were wondering are the plus countries and counting that will be represented at this year s global voices citizen media summit.
They couldn't do anything but stand there and stare.
She tossed me grapes and I tried to catch them with my mouth.
You are the man I've been looking for.
He isn't afraid of death.
egyptian sandmonkey is blogging again and promises to take it slow until he finds his feet again.
afrahnasser asks with remorse.
Tom seems OK now.
chanad bahraini posts a video showing clashes in bahrain between riot police and protesters from the vantage point of the protesters.
land is a right.
chile is battling an environmental crisis called the red tide global voices.
I helped him yesterday.
in another post es pablo shares a video about the work of ecuadorian artist carla sanchez better known as budoka.
a video of the estudiantina playing the very traditional venezuelan song alma llanera became the center of conversation in blogs and tweets francisco toro in his blog caracas chronicles got curious enough to contact the group and interview them online here s a piece of the interview es in which professor jun ishibashi leader of the group shares the story of the initiative.
I've been a teacher for two years.
the best of the blogs awards have you submitted your blog global voices.
nikko is more than temple town it s also a popular outdoor destination the mild temperatures of japan s fall months make nikko a popular vacation spot.
philippines maritime disaster global voices.
my father human rights defender nabeel rajab is arrested again bahrain nabeelrajab tweets adam nabeel rajab from bahrain the activist is being detained for seven days pending investigation over comments he published on twitter.
I'm not surprised.
What is the purpose of your visit?
The tourists were fascinated with the exquisite scenery.
be right back i m going to put a bit of already used yerba up on the roof to use again when it dries.
This word is also French in origin.
uae blogger e ashig reflects on social life in the middle east social commitments are one of the biggest wastes of time and i can see why it is difficult to be dedicated to your work or be creative as there is always some social thing to interrupt you a death to be mourned a birth to be celebrated an illness to be nursed wedding parties a formal majles gathering etc.
Is this your umbrella?
all bloggers should.
Please help me.
The door's locked.
That's my cat.
I love trying new things.
I bought her a watch.
cctv system by lydia shiningbrightly on flickr used under cc by.
a few years later as an avid internet surfer i stumbled upon global voices it made me feel the same way yet more attentively and mindfully with an honest and keen willingness to know others i quickly became a frequent visitor and soon after september i decided to volunteer as a spanish english into arabic translator.
lebanese blogger ali hammoud salutes norman finkelstein who visited lebanon recently.
I won't do it again.
Could you please repeat that?
since child labor is outlawed it is difficult to ask the government or other organizations for protection of child labor noemi gutierrez a young coordinator for connatsop the potosi council of organized child workers says.
If you want to hear a scary story, I'll tell you about a dream I had a few weeks ago.
Come closer.
a week does not go by without more stories in newspapers about violence in the capital antananarivo all segments of the population from the most to the least privileged are victims of this scourge murder assault armed robbery have been commonplace in the last three years.
I'm sure Tom will tell us the truth.
He hurt his left hand with a knife.
Did you catch the train?
It's time to go.
francisco rodriguez cruz is a cuban journalist and activist who for over a year has maintained a controversial blog es committed to advancing the rights of the lesbian gay bisexual and transgender lgbt community in cuba this is a community that has experienced a difficult history of discrimination on the island.
back then i was there.
yolanda maturana s postcard illustrated by catalina uribe and used with permission.
See you tomorrow.
the flag mural is located on the facade of an abandoned building on san jose street in old san juan and before its makeover locals and tourists alike often took photos of it as a memory of their visit the door is surrounded by litographs of famous puerto rican artists made by the collective grabadores por grabadores.
the following is an adaptation of an interview conducted by lucia mbomio and published originally on afrofeminas it is republished on global voices as part of a content sharing agreement.
Will you lend me your dictionary?
the fact that iraq was beaten out of the tournament was not lost on qatari bloggers diamond wrote.
i was making a very simple sketch in a notebook of tree rings and i quite quickly made a connection between tree rings and chapters in a book paterson says.
I'm in love with you.
The curtain has not yet risen.
What do you intend to do?
an illustration from the square country fairy tale drawn by natalia ni permission to use granted by altyn kapalova.
We were ordered to do that.
He looks like an honest man.
jordanian batir wardam writes a sharp satirical post on what is required from candidates to guarantee a seat in the jordanian parliament.
volunteers chronicle the lives of murdered colombian activists in words and drawings global voices.
people from around the world including iran have uploaded their photos on the facebook page for zahra s paradise.
That's an imitation.
prominent human rights activist abdul hadi al khawaja is currently in prison serving a life sentence for his role in the protests.
I appreciate all you did.
This bicycle is mine.
part featuring ali asif galib bn.
The man who is standing there is my father.
register now for the global voices summit january in cebu philippines global voices.
this is like singing in the bath when you are relaxed you will entertain yourself you have the passion for creativity and expression bathroom singing could not be published those who happen to hear it may suffer but for the guy who is enjoying himself in the misty bathroom he could not control himself.
fear is counter productive when kids are afraid they shut down when you use it to intimidate children all they hear is the anger not anything you might be trying to say i choose love over fear.
Are these yours?
One million people lost their lives in the war.
syria describing damascus global voices.
though much of the kabul s imagery conformed to my understanding of the country there were many other moments that cameras rarely capture old and new traditions and modernity are locked in a struggle afghans slowly and steadily seem to be the winners.
some groups claim there was a western conspiracy to break up yugoslavia and others blame the mismanagement of political elite regardless of the cause of the crisis yugoslav leaders had a historic opportunity to use the fact of the country s stability over years to strengthen unity between the various ethnic groups instead the ruling serbs sought to intensify serbian industrial and economic superiority in order to monopolize political and military power serbian intellectuals and politicians avidly promoted serbian superiority fueling national chauvinism and hatred towards bosnian muslims albanians and croats demands from dissenting groups were met with bloody crackdowns even the large portion of the serbian political elite that opposed the ruling socialist party stood with the regime at this time the result was a civil war.
stop killing and targeting journalists.
These dogs are big.
or learn how to make different bags using a square of fabric and knots in what is known in japan as furoshiki.
aileen garcia meowtilus august.
human rights watch is calling for the immediate release of the saudi american citizen mohammad salama detained over tweets criticizing the qu ran.
We left the final decision to him.
Get me the scissors, please.
It's artificial.
the video below pt shows the bicicloteca in action in sao paulo.
Who drew it?
Tom is a fluent speaker of Japanese.
Tom's behavior is unacceptable.
You can go home now.
I'm proud to have him as a friend.
the cabanellas palace at the corner of sarmiento and san luis art nouveau or modernisme according to catalans the building was designed by francesc roca i simo who came from majorca and barcelona to rosario in the early twentieth century he stayed in rosario less than a decade and never stopped planning lavish buildings like this one.
shawn at uncultured com posts a video on eve teasing a euphemism to describe forms of verbal and physical abuse by men against women.
Would you please pour me a cup of coffee?
lebanon facebook group in support of gaza bound maryam global voices.
apres le passe colonial est tout sauf oublie en allemagne dans le sud ouest africain la suppression du regime d apartheid etouffa tout debat public sur le genocide ce fut aux descendants des victimes qu il incomba de garder vivante la memoire du genocide aussi bien dans des commemorations que par la transmission orale.
mahameh khobim wonders fa about the timing of such a surprising revelation why and why now the blogger speculates that a group of the conservative right must be targeted to be disappeared.
trinidad tobago griffith antoni global voices.
Please get out of the car.
moldova turkey natalya morar s istanbul airport adventure global voices.
You speak like your mother.
I saw him running.
I don't know what's worse: being stupid or pretending to be stupid.
He is more lucky than clever.
She was promoted.
the prime minister has refused to acknowledge the calls by the opposition to resign and has declared that he will do so only when a new president is elected with both the opposition and the government being supported by opposing regional and international powers no solution seems possible until these powers agree to a solution or a compromise.
alliance for kurdish rights has uploaded several pictures showing turkish riot police have used tear gas and water canons to disperse protesters from the district of yuksekova.
She's way taller than me.
headlines about collapsing buildings and pulling children s bodies from the rubble are common in egypt ibn al dunya writing in fustat briefs us about the latest tragedy which took away five innocent lives.
since blog action day has called upon bloggers around the world to hit the keys one day one topic thousands of voices the topic of this year is human rights and the date is october in joint effort bloggers podcasters and others will highlight the important global issue and what better way of highlighting human rights than using one everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression human rights declaration article.
mural in budapest playground photo courtesy of alternative budapest.
That's a good idea.
project term word cloud click to see a larger image.
There is a fork missing.
image from ostagram ru.
There was absolutely no furniture in that room.
No words can relieve her deep sorrow.
We usually have breakfast at 7:30.
this post is part of our special coverage europe in crisis.
amer worked in several arab newspapers is currently working in albayan newspaper in the uae newspaper and publishes his work on aljazeera website he won the arab journalism award for best cartoonist in the arab newspapers and publications for three times in and.
why are canadians the villains in the tv show south park.
I don't live here.
several iranian bloggers have reacted to the death of osama bin laden some with serious remarks a few with questions and some with irony.
For me, it's important.
the complete list of organizations is available in the original spanish language article their efforts are well documented on facebook and instagram such as those of mi convive my buddy a group with clear and ambitious goals.
I can't stand him.
twitter also echoed carlos eduardo s journey.
Generally speaking, history repeats itself.
we love you we just want you to dress better is how the lebanese blogger graphic designer mustapha aka beirut spring introduces the project he s addressing the daily star online edition which is the one of the web s leading source of lebanese and regional news.
We lived in Osaka for ten years before we came to Tokyo.
Are you angry at what I said?
Thanks to your help, I could succeed.
in this short video omnia khalil reflects on the massive change society underwent on social and political aspects during the last three decades in architecture urban developments and art full research is available online at waly center journal issue cc by nc sa.
eye.
scholars and experts are urging the german government to rethink its unconditional support of israel global voices.
on july authorities used batons and tear gas to prevent protesters calling for political and judicial reforms from organising a sit in outside the cabinet building.
I am pleased to see you.
very quickly the page of jolie s film at imdb com turned into a virtual battlefield between serbs and muslims in the past few days however pages of comments have somehow been reduced to five.
they shout a slogan which translates as one afghanistan no tajik no hazara no pashtun.
on february during the egyptian revolution christians put their own lives at risk protecting muslims praying at tahrir square in cairo amid violence between protesters and egyptian president mubarak s supporters for more background on the context of the photos see our special coverage of the egypt protests.
marinam the daughter of former malaysian prime minister dr mahathir bin mohamad has an update on her father s condition dr mahatir is undergoing heart surgery in malaysian capital kuala lumpur.
which one is wrong hiv or homosexuality is the post of egyptian blogger mostafa husein s post.
the february movement which opposes military rule in mauritania organised ar a human chain along the gamal abdul naser street protesters taking part in the event carried posters with a question mark on them reflecting the situation in mauritania after the shooting ar of mauritanian president mohamed ould abdelaziz where mauritanians are asking who shot the president and who is ruling the country now.
Is that yours?
It's raining cats and dogs here.
fears are growing that the embattled government in syria may move to shut down the internet observers are concerned that the regime having realized the full potential of using the internet may cut it to deprive the opposition from a strategic lifeline.
lex limbu highlights a photography project of surendra lawoti which will try to record the landscape of the kathmandu valley in transformation.
I hate it when I work late and end up missing an episode of a show I'm following.
decap they should give nodar kumaritashvili a posthumous gold medal that would be the classy thing to do to remember a fallen athlete.
I don't know if I have the time.
the collapsing of buildings happens all too often in egypt many are the examples were an extra storey or two has been added without the approval of the authorities this going on for years sometimes before it s discovered or in cases like this with a fatal outcome.
Tom's a bit freaked out.
libya a convenient execution global voices.
He is getting better day by day.
The airplane made a safe landing.
bugaeva s finished dictionary was presented to a group of ainu community members in tokyo at the ainu cultural center which itself has online resources dedicated to transmitting the ainu language in february the online tool created in collaboration with japanese co editor shiho endo and programmer david nathan elar director soas university of london and with an art input of the ainu community with web design by tamami kaizawa.
He couldn't bring himself to shoot the deer.
My sister is a very good typist.
It is cold.
israeli blogger david bogner discusses why it s not possible to make peace with the palestinians now.
we call on all citizens who feel responsibility do not act indifferently to the arbitrariness of the authorities every tajik citizen s freedom depends on the freedom of shuhrat today shuhrat was sentenced but tomorrow any of us can be in his place think while it is not too late.
My favorite music instrument is the flute.
bali bombers to be executed next month global voices.
the blog includes an interactive map where readers can keep up with the journey and click on related stories.
to discussed our frazzled reactions to the campaign this second episode of this three part series is a fun fast paced conversation between.
I lost my watch, so I have to buy one.
inspired by the worldwide contagious happiness that was sparked by pharrell williams viral music video happy as can be seen in hundreds of dancing videos from around the world brazilian group of video makers jeitinho carioca shit cariocas say has created a local version for rio de janeiro with a satirical tone.
the season of carnival and mardi gras means delicious foods are on the menu around the world to whet your appetite we present here some recipes for characteristic dishes from different french speaking areas all proud representatives of french culinary heritage bon appetit.
photo shared by miriamjsdea on twitter.
so there was irony in that for me the reality is actually there s not such a dissimilar history and we were walking it as we spoke says malek.
Tom is from Boston.
Are you through with the phone?
He tried to master French.
You should sleep.
let s go wash our hands.
algeria.
It's not at all impossible.
here is a selection of some of his beautiful photographs.
We received word of his death.
eritrea visit eritrea blog global voices.
as a reader of comics i will always defend its capacity to tell all kinds of stories but as a mexican i m worried that so far just a foreign and first world vision determines the discourses on mexican violence the french get a scholarship to publish a beautiful book about juarez but mexicans from juarez want to publish comics in the u s and make movies and sell action figures i just know of one exception from the narrative comic gap about violence in mexico edgar clement s work.
turkey trici venola s istanbul drawings global voices.
He was poor and couldn't buy a coat.
brazil s president lula da silva inaugurated the world s largest graffiti at over square feet in the area of foz do iguacu this area famous for the iguacu falls and the triple border where paraguay brazil and argentina meet will now be home to a decorated highway honouring children and teenager s rights.
I like helping others.
brazil bicycle brings books to the homeless global voices.
You're rich.
gv show special interview with wahda masrya an egyptian girl global voices.
policia arresto a alcalde de espinar en vivo gol canal n http fb me ljo ukqc.
one jerusalem reflects on the arab israeli peace process years after the historic visit of egyptian president anwar al sadat to israel.
the location also host events such as algeria the first edition took place last year and a second one is scheduled this year similarly a start up weekend was organized for this coming summer by the government among the sponsors for the events are the usual industry heavyweights google and microsoft.
lebanon blogging the elections global voices.
while it may sound like a bad joke today s world toilet day focuses on a not so funny issue impacting almost half the world s population a lack of toilets and sanitation.
An investigation is going on.
Would you mind shutting the door?
additionally once you start typing it creates a keylogger file called c docume admini locals temp dclogs sys which is also shown.
I don't know because I wasn't there.
telegraf telegrafrs july.
The rainy weather lasted for ten days straight.
bolivia has million inhabitants one million are child workers some who started working as early as seven of these almost half are girls the girls like their jobs are often hidden inside homes or in the backs of restaurants.
the turkish parliament has passed a year long mandate which approves cross border military action the motion was passed by votes in the seat turkish parliament.
Earthquakes frequently hit Japan.
What is the meaning of this word?
That woman is much older than I am.
Who broke the vase?
a petition to demand action can be found here.
iraq fishing and bombs global voices.
support syrian bloggers and activists facebook page published a photo of the counter of victims and refugees of the war in syria which has recently been installed by commonstep association in the center of bulgaria s capital sofia the online counter can be found on commonstep s website.
Everything happens for a reason.
remarkable in yolanda was her preoccupation for the sustainability of the resources that nourished her community which is the reason why she supported the legalisation of subsistence hunting in the collective territory of santa cecilia.
the questions that come to our mind will the us become more interventionist or isolationist could a woman president in the us change things for women around the world will the us become a harder place for immigrants and minority groups to live.
You can't speak English, can you?
zambia s participation at previous olympic games is recorded here.
a new tradition.
Tom wants to know if it hurts.
Tom died.
Let me know if you hear anything.
the government and the security forces just seem powerless in the face of these heartless crimes that are being committed in our small island jamaican blogger stunner says that the violence is hitting too close to home.
and dave weinberg of jewneric focuses on the positives of the pope s visit to a synagogue which sets an historical precedent.
Let's just be friends.
She teaches reading and writing.
The police set out to solve the crime.
akram rslan a syrian cartoonist was detained after publishing a cartoon criticizing embattled syrian president bashar al assad.
Is that black bag yours?
a traffic police accepting bribe from a bus conductor yangon myanmar photo from video uploaded by nyan linn aung.
egypt boys arrested on suspicion of harassing girls global voices.
as we are starting with english and as the demand increases as is with our whole site and model we will slowly integrate other languages we are looking at french swahili and arabic.
blogger kamel mahdhaoui pays tribute fr to yahyaoui saying.
syria.
photo from humans of shanghai facebook page.
The clock ticked.
Tom looks tired this morning.
tell us how you fight online censorship and share your successful stories with us.
She wants to work at the hospital.
ranwayehia what i never expected was for the pain to be reversed.
mr arvanitis wow that s difficult for mr dendias and he is from the same place as you from corfu.
I'm really not hungry.
Are you sure you haven't forgotten anything?
lebanese blogger and software developer mir analyzed the lebanese blogs and shared her results in this post.
I think I mistakenly deleted that file.
bellavista santiago chile photo by patricia vargas used with permission.
I must buy one.
bahrain wall art global voices.
diaspora blogger uncommon sense highlights the plight of a cuban youth activist who was sentenced this week to years in prison for offenses against authority.
This bread is delicious.
cherry blossom season is here viewing the delicate flower is a seasonal excuse in japan for friends family and colleagues to get together and enjoy food and beers underneath the full bloom of sakura.
mahmood explains.
Are you older than Tom?
the struggle of memory against forgetting.
About 10 people are waiting.
blogger arrests in ethiopia violate the international covenant on civil and political rights freezone bloggers http bit ly g munm.
why is vietnam an s shaped country global voices.
rosario municipality lions palace photo maxid cc by nc nd.
Great weather, isn't it?
food security livestock health and sanitation.
palestinian haitham sabbah writes about digital resistance in this post.
in the past months iranian bloggers have reacted to several media reports of plans for the clean internet or national internet blogger uniirani says fa the islamic republic s decision is a big leap towards transforming into north korea another blogger visionthetruth said fa that after the internet is nationalised it will be the turn of satellites.
australians divided by durban ii boycott global voices.
jordan things to do in amman global voices.
I have been here since five o'clock.
you can follow as an hincha fan of anita garibaldi on their official web in spanish english and portuguese or with the hashtag desafioanita.
The company president was indicted for paying kickbacks.
roskomnadzor has blocked wechat how s putin going to talk with xi jinping now texting or what.
He was covered with mud from head to foot.
in uganda the same move towards the adoption of a local content policy is being made as explained on the in eastafrica website.
He had no difficulty solving the problem.
Who invented the telephone?
He's very honest, so we can rely on him.
for those who wants an english guide can download from here digiactive s first guide a digiactive introduction to facebook activism you can read about the guide in global voices advocacy you can also use these tools to revamp your facebook campaign.
My wife catches colds easily.
georgia tragedy strikes as winter olympic games open global voices.
Let's turn off the television.
May I ask a couple of questions?
businessmen after all are technocrats lionized daily in the conduct of community life they are requested to grace occasions of gross solemnity like cutting ribbons for a food branch or attending visual exhibits which their philistine notion of art cannot comprehend or given some media space for a comment or two that may not even be worth a slice of melamined tofu money having pushed them into the top of the oligarchic world has mantled them with erudition finesse.
I'm not taking a vacation this year.
movie is full of political manipulations lies false informations etc also raped muslim women is very disputed it is famous case when raped sarajevo woman gave birth of african child actually the father in this case was member of un personal.
eran amir produced a stop motion video showing people around israel holding up more than developed pictures you ll have to see it twice once to focus on the story told through the black and white pictures the people hold and the other to enjoy watching the people and scenery of israel.
the fear and instability that accompanies these raids have thrust school officials into a role that has now become all too common for teachers health care professionals and social workers attempting to provide some sense of guidance and reassurance in a time of immense uncertainty a survey of teachers principals and counselors conducted by the civil rights project at ucla found that percent of administrators cited absenteeism among immigrant students as a problem and percent of principals and counselors reported academic decline among immigrant students.
Let's take a look.
according to a report pt on human rights in brazil released in the beginning of this year by human rights watch.
protest back on inside district wad nubawi fighting back police cars in sideroads firing tear gas houses.
School begins at 8:30 a.m.
prior to the ruling us destroyers had been patrolling the contested waters as part of what one us official described as the us navy s routine presence in the region.
The hospital opened last month.
Sit wherever you like.
I will fly to Germany.
We met a writer.
how women can stay safe in india global voices.
political bickering between different parties has reached dangerous levels to the extent that there is a genuine fear of civil strife among people especially since street fights are breaking out every now and then between supporters of various groups.
I'm cutting down on sweets.
When does it end?
I have no idea.
You must clean your room.
petition to congress and president obama stop the killing in syria.
Our living room is sunny.
the village links ru to a new tumblr blog ru that posts photos of cars parked in the bike lane at the moscow state university mgu campus the anonymous blogger introduces ru the blog itsagoddamnbikelane tumblr com this way i work at mgu s chemistry department and i m proud that a bike lane has been created in front of it not everyone shares my joy here you will see who exactly does not share it.
My son had been writing for several hours when I entered the room.
Please keep it secret.
If it rains tomorrow, we won't go.
iran two bloggers and student leader on hunger strike in prison global voices.
ayesha kazmi who blogs as american paki was disappointed at the way eltahawy s article spectacularly splintered feminism.
nana no mention of the incident.
I had a bad dream last night.
Tom's horse reared suddenly and threw him.
You're here.
Tell me about him.
maria boa mariaboa august.
Tom never talked about Mary.
the global voices citizen media summit has been made possible thanks to the generous support of the ford foundation mozilla macarthur foundation and groundviews centre for policy alternatives.
hundreds of indigenous people invaded a plenary session of the chamber of deputies and took the congressmen s seats photo by jose cruz agencia brasil cc by.
Have you finished?
For some reason the microphone didn't work earlier.
international mother language day in bamako mali.
I don't like swimming in pools.
You are exaggerating the problem.
I love you.
hyderabad india july.
as facebook ceo mark zuckerberg faced hearing before the us congress this week digital rights advocates around the world publicly shared testimony of their own giving voice to the experiences of millions of users who have struggled with harassment discrimination and threats of violence on the platform.
four women icons of the syrian revolution global voices.
we are never explicitly told but we do sense that ghassan and alexandra are actually mariyah s father and mother which makes the story all the more compelling.
That was my mistake.
i just graduate on high school and i never learned about bosnian war as i never learned about refugee camps do you feel like something has to be done in education as a mom and as an activist.
to the girl who shared the siege with me i love you eastern aleppo december photo by salih abo qusay used with permission.
threats of criminal charges do not deter macedonia s colorful revolutionaries global voices.
He closely resembles his father.
Clean the dirt off the mirror.
I'd like to reserve a table for two.
the blog amo descubrir canciones es i love to discover songs reviews music from around the world with a special focus on latin america the blog includes specials with songs by country es song covers es and songs recommended by readers es the latter category includes a post on songs to recommend during a conversation in an elevator es.
If you're wrong, admit it. If you're right, be quiet.
yasmine bouchene algiers december photo by ophelia noor used with permission.
Tom spent three years in prison for what he did.
google has doodles for birthdays and other days that only a tiny portion of the world celebrates.
blogger of the week solana larsen global voices.
it will stay and it will be updated on a regular basis i will use it to share some valuable information and news about hcv.
radio yande producers in paraty rio de janeiro photo official radio yande facebook page published with permission.
veiling in morocco is not a law but a choice some women may wear it in submission to their husbands but many women wear it as a sign of faith in and respect for the islamic code on the street veiled women walk openly with their unveiled sisters and friends women in the same family may or may not choose to veil and it s nobody else s concern older women still wear the full veil revealing only their eyes i have even seen the occasional burqa like the afghan women wear.
Are there any English magazines in this library?
we d like to tell nld lawmakers what we face on the ground but they no longer come to us said mung ra.
Perhaps she will come tomorrow.
A hungry man is an angry man.
in this special edition of the global voices show shahinaz talks about her own reasons for blogging the risks faced by egyptian bloggers who dare criticise the authorities her friend the imprisoned blogger kareem amer whom she encouraged us all to write by giving us self addressed stamped envelopes and the activist blogging scene in egypt.
google and global voices announced the winners at an awards ceremony held during the global voices summit in santiago chile may.
traffic jam at the overcrowded mega city dhaka is one of the most irritating problems in bangladesh karim at amader kotha shares some secret tips to utilize those boring moments of immobility when you are stuck in a jam.
Let's sing and dance.
zannevesht a blogger and journalist refers fa in her blog to neda s death and says courageous iranian women and girls have been present in this protest movement.
chen chiafu from ministry of tofu posts a collection of funny pictures which reflect the three stereotype images of chinese youth the ordinary the artistic and the idiotic.
I'll stay until Tom leaves.
you can also help spread the word about the global voices summit and breaking borders by flying one of our summit badges or banners on your blog or web site.
the ministry of agriculture livestock and fish es announced through a press release es the new prices that are being set for the produce that is to say for the producer.
He's stupid and dishonest.
How rude of you!
He and I walked together.
I don't have an excuse.
the lack of creativity of the ad.
He regained consciousness three hours after the accident.
I had a nap for about an hour.
at the end of her post fantasia wonders.
digital economy is characterised by two concurrently opposing forces one is the creation and spread of small firms and the other is the growth and expansion of larger structures.
sri lanka ranil and others global voices.
You should swear on the Bible.
arabs.
Return this book as soon as you can.
The boy ran away.
May I ask where are you going?
I've worked here for many years.
moroccan chefs samira and sabah have started a new blog moroccan kitchen in which they provide recipes for moroccan cuisine.
arte fora do museu art outside the museum pt intends to map online art from the streets of sao paulo brazil the project so far has mapped pieces from grafittis sculptures walls and architectural works.
several other suggestions were put forward at the town hall meeting including the installation of a playground footpaths and a petanque ground no suggestions of toilets and water fountains were put forward the redevelopment should cost the city a total of million euros.
solidarity campaigns in support of razan continue palestinian blogger abir kopty tweeted.
At the bottom of the letter he wrote "Kind regards," then signed his name.
spain citizen journalist award global voices.
Let's not talk.
Let's make a trade.
We went to the same church.
the awards are hosted by deutsche welle and are considered among the most prestigious awards for bloggers over blogs videoblogs and podcasts were nominated in categories for the bobs this year and made the final cut.
He was hit by a car and died right away.
I thought we weren't going to go there.
My dream is to become a firefighter.
alim sherzamonov a member of qudratov s social democratic party of tajikistan and the man global voices alexander sodiqov was interviewing when famously arrested in the tajik town of khorugh wrote.
egypt mubarak fined for internet blackout during revolution global voices.
Where in Austria did you grow up?
israel airport security detains british rapper global voices.
She asked me where I was going.
international and regional human rights groups including the gulf center for human rights and amnesty international are urging bahraini authorities to release ebtisam al saegh photo credit amnesty international.
How much did you have to pay for the tickets?
What else do you want?
we re calling on those whose friends relatives colleagues or compatriots have been threatened to help create and update the profiles of those missing or under arrest so we can seek additional sources verify and link to online campaigns dedicated to freeing them.
this post is part of our special coverage egypt revolution.
the controversy could have kickstarted a sensible national conversation about our collective history and cycle of societal violence instead it has degenerated into a bit of a circus.
on january police detained nadim bou amoud a reporter for tunis review seized his camera and smartphone and deleted from his devices all content related to that day s protests two other journalists borhen yahyaoui from radio mosaique fm and ahmed rezgui from radio shems fm had their phones briefly confiscated by a police officer while they were covering a protest in kasserine.
Can I borrow your radio?
It's hot today.
art literature and music.
That's the place where I used to work.
syrian blogger razan ghazzawi has raised the alert of a possible internet cut in the capital damascus where she reports that the phone services are also down she tweets.
He shot at me.
Did you show it to your parents?
and the bills are coming due iran is teetering on the brink of bankruptcy much like the soviet union before it iran is collapsing internally as a result of its attempts to exert regional military power the similarities do not stop there the soviet union was also torn apart by ethnic minorities no longer willing to bear the brunt of the economic costs of supporting a corrupt totalitarian state.
a televised experiment.
on collective blog front line echo amraamra writes.
My alarm clock didn't go off this morning.
Which color do you like more, blue or red?
You're always criticizing me!
the following is a selection of tweets in chronological order.
Tom paid Mary back.
You can dance, can't you?
mother jones uploaded a video which simulates the bombing missions conducted by the united states in laos between to during the vietnam war era.
Can you help me?
be sure to check on the nekokago vlog for regular updates.
internet photo meme.
this ip address is owned by the ste syrian telecommunications establishment and is registered in damascus.
No one knows.
It may, indeed, be a mistake.
disaster early warning resource management.
migrant workers task force have no office or official organization but have been meeting regularly at zico house in hamra and will soon relocate some of their activities to migrant house in nabaa everyone involved in the project is a volunteer and they rely on small fundraising events to cover their costs.
sunshine from iraq shares with us here experience with eid marred by the fear of explosions bombings and concern about near and dear ones dying.
islam katimov the veteran leader of uzbekistan prefers not to sing in public he does dance however.
the belgian monarchy is one of the few unifying issues in a relatively new country less than years where the communities of majority flemish and walloon grow apart day by day due to flanders independence aspirations es under these circumstances doubts about prince philippe s leadership skills intensify on september belgian paper le soir published an interview with martin buxant fr journalist and author of the book belgium a king without a country when asked if prince philippe is ready to become king he answered.
lebanese activists formed a facebook group in support of a gaza bound ship called we are all maryam ar.
china state owned enterprises global voices.
Can you tell me the way to the library?
A boy like Tom doesn't deserve a girl like Mary.
Here is a book.
the islamic republic considers it good when people around the world go to the streets and protest except when it comes to iranians lebanese syrians and venezuelans yesterday iranian protesters were considered rioters today it is the turn of syrians.
It's exactly what I wanted.
amira khalil is more direct in her criticism and says.
He was wounded in the shoulder.
according to a new study by the global web index saudi arabia has more twitter users per capita than any other country on earth.
Don't speak in Japanese.
She plays the violin very well.
There's no need to hurry. We have plenty of time.
You should distinguish between right and wrong.
here is the excerpt el from their morning television broadcast.
Happy New Year!
encouraging for a swift adoption of marco civil in brazil the open letter was initiated by la quadrature du net and has already been signed by global organizations such as wikileaks reporters without borders and article as well as other national organizations from argentina austria belgium colombia france germany italy portugal poland and spain.
why did egyptians call nefertiti the mistress of happiness.
I can't do it.
Did you miss me?
Tom wanted to explain, but Mary wouldn't let him.
Please insert your card.
I don't like her.
our attendees who came from near and far within the philippines and from other parts of the world to be part of the event.
the project was born out of a groundbreaking research effort which began two weeks after the ouster of egyptian president hosni mubarak the research revealed that there is a clear need among legal aides and activists for improved access to information expertise and resources it s motto is to support existing institutions and networks through coordination and instead of competing for resources it believes in collaboration for achieving efficiency.
I know the girl.
from june to september a group of talented youth submitted en their entries to a short film competition about gender called gene of equality participants had to produce minute films in one of two categories minutes of gender equality or minutes on domestic violence prevention the competition is sponsored by the united nations development programme and the european union delegation to ukraine.
this year nine of the central and eastern european countries are organizing the national stages of the wiki loves earth photo competition this photo contest complements the regional article writing contest cee spring which aims to support content creation about the region and includes a category dedicated to nature and geography.
kim died on dec and president lee myung bak was visiting japan from dec to if president lee had not really heard the news that means the south korean government s intelligence is really awful or if he had known about the news that would mean he is really lousy at risk management.
danwei s editors have chosen a list of model workers websites which provide and translate most significant news comments and informations on china.
the high population of male and the scarcity of land have created a high demand for housing it has also made rent in male comparatively one of the highest in the world a construction boom during the last years had created a high demand for migrant workers.
we ll follow the advice as well.
according to bugaeva.
trinidad born frances anne solomon is a blogger and award winning filmmaker who has just completed her most recent project a winter tale set in the violent downtown toronto community of parkdale the story begins with the gathering of a black men s support group which was formed after a bullet meant for a local drug dealer kills an innocent boy multi layered and expertly crafted the film speaks to a multicultural community s experience in an adopted land.
What's your favorite music?
saferjourno toolkit digital resources for media trainers.
Here's a yellow rose.
What is that huge building?
It was very kind of you to lend me an umbrella.
bahrain s mps have tabled a motion to root out homosexuality in the country.
the tunisian government announced its intention to implement two media reform laws which were passed by the interim government in november decree law on media freedom printing and publishing and decree law on the creation of an independent broadcasting authority the announcement came late in the day on october after a one day strike by the vast majority of tunisian state and privately owned print broadcast and online media.
traveling alone has its advantages you make your schedules you set the rythm you decide when to leave and how to arrive i always tell my friends that for an unaccompanied trip you first need to be open to making new friends.
Can't you do anything to help me?
I don't like these remarks.
Either you or I must attend the meeting.
Open the window.
lj user kabierac posted martin niemoller s poem first they came on his blog and called belarusian fellow bloggers to use the emblem of the white legion as their userpic image to express solidarity with the four individuals detained in connection with july blast his post bel rus has made it into the top of the yandex blogs portal.
it was with this that walid al saqaf founder of portal yemen began a panel on censorship and digital surveillance at the arab bloggers meeting ab that took place from the of january in amman.
iranian blogger ghalbir quoted the basij leader and says it proves that filtering is a joke.
I love it.
I'm sleepy!
I can't take the heat.
the hack in cairo may june.
runner statue mocked up as a rioter photo courtesy of the athens indignants multimedia team licensed as cc by nc nd.
Is the bank far from here?
I haven't seen you in years.
united russia s fabulous flouting of gaussian distribution image sergei shpilkin livejournal.
the author of the blog march zouhair yahyaoui day for net freedom a blog that was launched to dedicate march to yahyaoui writes fr.
netzpolitik org looks at how a german arab company is promoting a new trojan to law enforcement and intelligence services.
Had I arrived earlier, I could have seen Kelly.
The play is at eight o'clock.
God helps those who help themselves.
The cops are here.
farhad afshar reflects on fa how the majority of the population in iowa are white but still preferred to vote for a black candidate the blogger also writes.
usa voices without votes global voices.
blogger com is now blocked in turkey announces turkeytalk this follows the blocking of wordpress and youtube following court orders.
My wife is afraid to drive my new car.
Tom always wears a tie to work, except on Fridays.
the questions that come to our mind.
iran iran in photos global voices.
You're mocking me.
rice contaminated with high levels of the toxic heavy metal cadmium dubbed cadmium rice is the latest food scandal in china to trigger public panic and anger among the country s consumers.
following her detention alkhawaja a dual danish bahraini citizen had her passport confiscated on september it was reported that her detention had been extended for an additional ten days for further investigation.
the twitter account of the malian presidency has not been updated since march when it refuted the alleged power grab fr.
He paid no attention to my warning.
Let's split.
slutwalk brazil marchavadias protests on the streets of brazilian federal state capitals such as sao paulo belo horizonte recife florianopolis curitiba porto alegre belem rio de janeiro and vitoria and the federal district this weekend they demand an end to violence against women and will be echoing slogans like my body my rule and neither saint nor whore a woman information on the social movement website.
created on november humans of bolivia is one of the newest facebook pages to mirror humans of new york in the region esteli puente and mijhail calle want to create the same empathy they saw in the new york project and similar projects like humans of amsterdam the feeling that humanity is formed by individuals with their own stories.
the project from the other global voices laureate jillian c york also takes on private companies though from a different angle.
grito de lares black flag in santurce with the machete a symbol of struggle and defiance this is the flag of the town of lares puerto rico and it is emblematic of the independence movement of the island photo by spear torres used with permission.
bahraini mahmood al yousif comments on the treatment of indian workers on strike in bahrain.
watch a short history of japan s frighteningly good horror films global voices.
what you see on my userpic now is the emblem of what used to be the white legion whose former members are now being blamed for the recent blast i join the initiative to support them by at least changing my userpic i really sympathize with all the victims of the terrorist act but unfortunately the real perpetrators are not likely to be ever held responsible for it.
There are numerous universities in Kyoto.
I'll miss you.
we do not change policies which will affect the lives of countless innocent refugees.
a postcard seller displays images of famous afghans in kabul photo by aaquib khan.
how does a regime get rid of political opponents and critics in countries where religion plays an important role in the lives of the majority one way is to throw them in jail and say they insulted islam and its prophet that way almost no one will come to their rescue.
i studied at a campus where i used to hear gunfire more often than the hustle of freshman students the sight of army snipers with their firearms is as familiar to me as the loud chants of protests under the dome of cairo university.
He likes oranges.
rolex introduced its cosmograph daytona series in designed specially to meet the demands of professional racers a watchmaker in st petersburg reportedly told the fontanka news agency that a rolex daytona could likely be purchased on russia s black market for about euros.
Go back to your seats.
Does your friend like tea?
My mother has a driver's license, but she doesn't drive.
One million people died in the war.
Does the story have a happy ending?
Do you study English?
Tom felt strong.
My mother bought me a new dress.
She wrote a book about birds.
I was wrong.
greece athens st african film festival global voices.
transeunte edited by rocio nunez points out the advantages of the metrobus in particular.
a social media campaign to raise support for the arrest of ugandan guerrilla leader and wanted war criminal joseph kony has taken a new twist in a blog post titled kony is a parody sean jacobs looks at online parody videos about the viral campaign.
the question here is how did we get to this point anyone being logical would say that chavismo is a system that slowly but surely meddles with every aspect of society even if some of these aspects are not big in number they put them away to complete their social domination.
What do you say to taking a rest?
i passed my engineering in well into the era of software it was almost a norm for one to prepare for his gre and get going to the usa for higher studies en route to a job abroad and life as an nri of course those who did not make it always had somebody in dubai or nearby who could land them a decent job i remember in those days the times of india bombay had a special edition for jobs abroad and guys would unfailingly pick up copies of the same week after week.
egypt a lebanese in egypt from occupation to liberation global voices.
mehri says on twitter if iran sleeps tonight it will sleep forever.
There were three people waiting in front me.
What does he see in her?
I come to school by bus.
Water freezes at zero degrees Celsius, doesn't it?
on twitter supporters from saudi arabia and across the arab world spoke up against the punishment dohan alsalem says badawi s name has now been immortalised.
our life is about simple things we must get undressed and get to work work till we sweat if we don t we ll perish.
he later adds.
update the russian website tjournal reports that at least some of the women featured in the calendar were mortified to learn about the suggestive phrases attributed to them yara khasan or miss october reportedly posted a friends only message on facebook assuring her acquaintances back in syria that she and the other women knew nothing about the calendar s racy captions.
I'm getting ready for the worst.
the artist known as azucar y sal said on her facebook page.
china what s stopping chinese economic reform global voices.
I want to go to America someday.
let me tell you on sunday we took the metrobus the first difficulty we faced was the turnstile since she is years old she does not pay so to enter she had to go under the turnstile the policeman instructed her but she looked at him carefully until she felt encouraged and dove in i must say that the people working on the metrobus were very friendly there are hosts who help you charge your card and provide any needed information.
world cup protests in brazil become gaza protests july.
This is the village where I spent my childhood.
we want to do many things for our communities and we have lots of ideas we also want to keep learning more and getting involved in different topics that resonate with us but when i look at this graphic i see that mainstream media might not have any space for us the word youth does not even appear here.
She became a nurse.
advox members marianne diaz and sarah myers are reporting live from the netmundial global internet governance meeting taking place from april in sao paulo brazil civil society corporate and government representatives from around the world have gathered to debate the future of internet governance in a post snowden world this post is part of series of features on the event.
I'm not in a hurry.
iran bahai students are out of universities global voices.
you can have your sexuality you don t have to lose it because you have hiv people tend to think that contracting hiv can spell the end of their sex lives but hiv positive africans of all ages are now being urged to reclaim their sexuality and live healthy normal lives i got this hiv through sex so i thought my sexuality was gone and i felt i needed to stop dressing attractively and wait to die florence anam an information officer at the kenya network of women with aids told irin plusnews.
Tom is angry with Mary.
rv what about security how do your journalists deal with the danger of reporting.
The area around here was bombed.
titled press freedom the by feet mural is now displayed at the npc with the alterations.
Without you, I'm nothing.
indigenous people occupy brazil s congress over land rights bill global voices.
the lady had a story which i thought was worth pursuing and capturing for broadcast what attracted me to her was the fact she did not hide she was hiv positive and to declare so in in malawi was almost a taboo yet she defied all odds of the time even when arvs were no there eight years down the road it is still difficult to do away with the golden silence over aids in malawi.
You can say whatever you want to.
the first roundup of somali blogs a small but steadily growing segment of the african blogsphere most somali bloggers predictably perhaps are young based outside somalia and write in english.
renanjustiniano if the mineral found yesterday is uranio uranium the first thing they should have done was verify if it was radioactive instead of calling the press bolivia.
on facebook around members to date have joined a group calling for the suspension of us sanctions on syrian air saying there is no reason to apply any type of sanctions against a civil carrier.
understanding is having lived it and experienced it.
snow in iran without electricity gas and water global voices.
my education has if anything hindered my employment lara mohsen a former student at al balqa applied university told global voices.
human rights and ethics advocate frederic jacobs notes that the number of people using tor is on the rise in turkey.
My name is known to everybody in my school.
fadwa suleiman photo by rami jarrah used with permission.
several sites reported fa that hossein ronaghi maleki iranian jailed blogger stopped his hunger strike after about one week hossein is serving a year prison sentence in the security ward of evin prison.
some photos ru of today s fire at a skyscraper under construction in moscow photos by ria novosti photographers at lj user drugoi s blog lj user aleshru s itar tass photos lj user sergey mikheyev s photos two photos of firefighting helicopters refilling in the moskva river by lj user nl on twitter ruradioscanner was live tweeting radio exchanges ru of the helicopter pilots.
this post is cross posted from syria untold.
for a short time documentary humano is free to watch online in celebration of the incan sun festival global voices.
screen capture of defaced site from mamfakinch com.
tanks and prayers in afghanistan global voices.
My father bought this hat for me.
one of the oldest slave descendent communities in brazil quilombo rio dos macacos where around families live has a date for eviction march the claim for the land comes from the navy of brazil that intends to broaden a condo for its officers in that territory in the border area between salvador and simoes filho state of bahia.
protesters inside the plaza las americas mall used with permission.
He is a daredevil.
understanding human rights in portuguese speaking countries global voices.
sri lanka preserving the covered bridge in badulla global voices.
I dislike being alone.
Don't look back.
on june egyptian were called to vote on the second round of the presidential elections amidst attempts by the supreme council for the armed forces scaf to keep a tight rein on the political stage with the parliament dissolved the new constitutional declaration giving almost all powers toscaf the choice between muslim brotherhood s candidate mohamed morsi and the regime s former prime minister ahmed shafiq gets even more painful.
revolutionary women have been peacefully marching daily side by side with men in the streets of yemen.
the chinese government s crackdown on human rights activists and opinion leaders continues samuel wade from china digital timeshas compiled information from all sources to update on the situation.
He heard a shout.
alas it seems beirut isn t that important in deciding the outcome of lebanon s presidential selection writes jamal.
civil groups will not be allowed to monitor the upcoming parliamentary elections in jordan reports blogger naseem al tarawnah.
very belatedly links to the posts at east ethnia and belgraded which talk about dobrica cosic s nobel prize in literature hoax.
the misattributed map is being shared by supporters of us president donald trump to support the idea that no go zones exist in france and it s also showing up on various french far right social media accounts.
tell me about global voices new developments.
Part of this conviction is rooted in my own experience.
imad mughniyeh exits a plane and is interviewed.
after introducing to free and open source software f oss in the previous article one might still wonder why corporates and governments need to adoption it or encourage its adoption.
I asked him to send us the book.
since global voices summits have brought together the most innovative and inspiring digital activist and citizen media communities from around the world these meetings have proven a rich breeding ground for ideas and collaborations across borders at the summit we also look forward to continuing that tradition as well as celebrations for our th anniversary.
new platform.
independent researchers in egypt have evidence that the security and intelligence sector in egypt now has the ability to target activists and internet users by sending them phishing links to gain access to their accounts and remotely control their computers but these news findings suggest that they are coordinating with the private telecom sector in new ways as well.
I don't want to be cremated.
I looked all over the house for that letter.
i would like to tell you about my grandmother boiko anna she was born and lives in the village of yaglush in rogatyn district of ivano frankivsk oblast she is a cheerful talented strong person a person who has been through a lot who is full of knowledge and memories.
Do you promise?
in the footsteps of shenzhen internet police the police in china s capital beijing will start patrolling websites registered on beijing servers using animated police officers that pop up in a user s browser from september st beijing s new virtual cops will be active on of china s portals including china s biggest blog hosting services sohu com and sina com by the end of the year the virtual police s patrols are expected to cover all websites registered with beijing servers according to the associated press the cartoon cops can walk bike or drive across the screen every minutes warning internet users to stay away from illegal internet content and bad websites.
Nobody lives in this house.
He's in trouble.
It's been stolen.
How far is it from your house to the park?
syria the revolution continues video global voices.
source ifex s toolkit.
My mother can't ride a bicycle.
I'll meet him tomorrow.
the condoms wending machines map helps people of major ukrainian cities to find the nearest machine and to receive the instructions on how to use it the advantages of the machines are speed and simplicity and that people can purchase the condoms anonymously without attracting attention of other people and without and interaction with shop assistance like in supermarkets or pharmacies antiaids web site reported.
the maddie saga s moroccan red herring made it possible for the spaniards to discover that there are moroccans with fair hair and light eyes as several spanish newspapers highlighted on wednesday.
our protest is not against the world cup but against the delayed construction works and the lack of care towards the population.
I dropped my keys.
a girl child worker from yemen global voices.
maryam al khawaja speaking in photo by amnestystudent via flickr cc by.
the lebanese adventurer maxime chaya whose exploits include climbing mount everest reaching the south and north poles to plant the lebanese flag blogs about his quests and posts beautiful photos on his live blog the three poles.
brothers juan andres and nicolas ospina.
Clean your room.
access a practical guide to protecting your identity and security online and when using mobile phones also available in multiple languages.
last september on election day reporters from reuters monitored voting at several polling stations across the country witnessing what they say were multiple cases of ballot stuffing and inflated turnout figures russian election officials later invalidated the voting results at nine different polling stations based on reports of voting irregularities.
I asked him where he was going.
Tom has recently been trying to improve his French.
Welcome.
Your necktie matches your suit.
I'm the one responsible for that.
Is this your bike?
This play has ended.
He said that he was happy.
She can speak French fluently.
egyptians vow to return on april.
He talked about her illness.
ccboon ccboon august.
Tom had something important to say, but Mary kept interrupting him.
That's not my wife.
grammy winning musician imogen heap has joined the team as the executive music producer will be producing the soundtrack for the documentary and will also be in charge of the world music collection.
how many times can unwra claim to be shocked by rockets in their schools before people stop buying it third time http t co qwhb hibdl yair rosenberg yair rosenberg july.
regresando hacia nuestro lugar de concentracion ibamos escuchando la radio y hablaban de muertos cada vez que salian las noticias el numero aumentaba muertos.
Does Tom speak French, too?
Pickpockets target tourists.
on january the new york public library announced that more than digitized items are now part of its public domain collection this means online readers can access and download a treasure trove of rare archived materials for free aside from this the library is encouraging the public to explore the digital collection and remix the materials in order to create and share new content.
mahamiou how many amina s are out there forced to marry their rapist morocco ripamina.
a facebook commenter reminds australia to respect the right of east timor to manage its oil resources it is the right of timorese people to determine where their resources should be processed for the people s best interest.
meanwhile meltem ay from london tweeted.
I have the ace of spades.
Please bring it back tomorrow.
He can scarcely write his name.
It's easy to see why people like Tom.
The monkey climbed up a tree.
shoshi a biology teacher kept an active blog and recently posted a podcast of her recent appearance on the radio where she describes the problems that arise with the existing average age of teachers in most israeli schools she claims that most young teachers leave their jobs after four years seeking better employment conditions she describes her fears for the future of education in israel.
I'm late for class.
no regrets.
I don't have time.
read about bassel s work and life.
Nobody listens until you say something wrong.
It's already past your bedtime.
russia offers million rubles to crack the tor network global voices.
this post is part of our special coverage mexico s drug war.
The police arrested the suspect.
varsonofiya went to mt athos on oct where he met with the new abbot at a monastery operating within the jurisdiction of the russian orthodox church.
demonstrations of support to the sidibouzid movement took place in paris munich and beirut.
and actor haris attonis tweeted a laconic observation on migration.
You will miss the train.
a cairo court acquitted photojournalist at yaqeen online news network ahmed gamal ziyada after he spent more than a year in pre trial detention ziyada was arrested in december while covering protests by supporters of ousted president mohamed morsi.
Put the book where you found it.
what is your story with hepatitis c hcv how did you discover you were infected.
art arises from snow covered tokyo global voices.
the decision was only taken at the last minute.
Tom isn't a kid anymore.
the next video warning graphic features dead children represents the syrian children case by rise humanity.
The grass needs cutting.
I didn't know Tom had to do that by himself.
meet mohammed mursi hosni mubarak global voices.
there are many intrepid travelers in the region many of them brave enough to explore any terrain or climate.
to facilitate access transfer and the sharing of knowledge and technology to reduce poverty as well as the social and digital divides across latin america while highlighting the need for free participation free culture and free knowledge as well as eliminating barriers that may impede creation and sharing.
school examination in phnom penh.
He likes fishing.
Have you gone nuts?
May I ask a couple of questions?
He is busy doing something.
as for the reactions of the relatively apolitical minsk residents kartina mira picture of the world blog run by a belarus based russian citizen has this sketch rus featuring a conversation overheard at one of the city s hairdressing salons.
more worries came from my father that had experienced the rough times of the ugandan dictator idi amin s repressive regime he said.
I quit smoking.
Tom and I are dependent on each other.
the right to bravery.
well since we indians have all the freedom we want we wont understand it when blogs and press freedom are not allowed we will feel it is ridiculous when so many blogers end up in jail for many of their comments like for example a saudi bloger is in jail now for some blog article of his similar cases have happened in africa tunisia bahrain kuwait egypt algeria etc.
palestine football player mahmoud sarsak set free global voices.
let s keep shaking walls and building bridges.
how the patch of land where the calais jungle once was looks like today image screenshot of youtube video by afp.
They've decided to get married next month.
I slept late.
Are you meeting someone here?
You have three pens.
a massive welcome for sarsak in gaza photo credit team palestine page facebook.
Sport is good for your health.
egypt utilizing technology to demand accountability on torture police brutality global voices.
You're still young.
typical fried fish prepared by the students photo by kuranicha.
I love her.
expression companies do not adequately inform the public about how content and information flows are policed and shaped through their platforms and services.
fm wai wai multilanguage channel simulradio broadcasts information on earthquake and disaster you can listen through internet here http bit ly eav i please pass the message to foreigners in japan.
from the food to security and what not a large amount of taxpayer s money is spent.
Don't worry, I'll translate that for you.
jeha s nail worries at the sight of the lebanese politicians going out of the country to get support for their political pursuit from regional and international powers a support that will make them pawns in the regional chess game.
mexico s national transparency platform is a new tool that helps promote the right of access to public information and transparency in mexico the platform portal allows anyone with internet access to obtain government information already available or request data that is not yet available.
since pakistan s inception as a nation in the job of entering the country s gutters to unblock and maintain the invisible sewerage networks that lie under all our feet have been performed by sanitary workers such as irfan masih who come from the underprivileged and otherised christian minority.
from the revolutions of tunisia and egypt and the arab world uprisings in the spring bahrain yemen syria to the devastating japan earthquake and the recent british riots citizen media has not only reported on many of the past year s major news stories but also been integral to some stories themselves.
You won't finish this project.
The man lost all hope.
roseann lake from chinafile explores why it s hard for chinese to say i love you in their own language from historical and sociological perspectives the piece has also introduced an experiment about chinese brain and its relation to love and romance.
meanwhile solidarity actions have multiplied such as the collective declaration pt somos quilombo rio dos macacos we are quilombo rio dos macacos by several public figures musicians poets and activists from bahia s movements.
if there was a time that i wished i was in the united states then it would be right now when the leader of the world s billion roman catholics pope benedict xvi makes his first apostolic journey to that nation his visit comes at a time that the holy roman catholic church is under attack from all corners including the recent sex abuse scandals that have rocked the church but not the faith of tens of millions worldwide who have continued under these dark times to practice the faith that was handed down by the apostles.
You must study much harder.
When I was a child, the most painful time of the day was mealtime.
I intend to stay at a five-star hotel.
above is an update posted by droubi on jaiku yesterday.
therefore he is required to enroll under the international program at the university of jordan although he passed the national tawjeehi the general secondary examination that grade students must take in order to apply for university admission he is still required to register as a foreigner and pays us dollars per credit hour while his colleagues enrolled in the competitive program pay jordanian dinars us dollars.
meanwhile the mainstream press has downplayed the veracity of such conspiracy theories refusing to report even the widely circulated rumor about jetphotos on facebook professor pablo ortellado described this lack of engagement from the mainstream press as misguided.
Could you do me a favor?
global voices interview kevin scannell talks about indigenous tweets and blogs by globalvoices.
This is the right answer.
What did you do when you got back home yesterday?
He's a tennis player.
Have you been to France before?
bermuda year old citizen publicly acknowledged for spreading happiness global voices.
i am not aware of any other country who has diverted its rivers and canals with dams and built roads through them to facilitate transit of goods of a neighboring country.
I find it hard to get up early on cold mornings.
caeo i don t necessarily see a difference between how i m treated in the police force compared to a white police officer that said it s a great honor that despite the many prejudices in this society i m not only a female police officer but also a black police officer.
this week two palestinian children were killed in cold blood by israeli forces eight others were wounded.
Tom isn't so tall.
She put on her coat and went out.
yemen updates tweeted.
ghonim concludes ar.
the balkans travelogue part ii global voices.
There's a drinking fountain by the tennis court.
How long do we have to wait?
the terror that ice raids sow in communities affects us all in immigrant communities this fear often results in a reluctance to call the police cooperate with authorities or show up in court the effects of which have already started to show in sexual assault reports by latinos in los angeles fell by percent while domestic violence reports declined by percent in denver colorado prosecutors reported that victims of domestic violence have refused to testify out of fear following ice arrests in the local courthouse.
creative alternatives to filtering.
Where is his clinic located?
the worst backlash was from the religious establishment she says they took the friday sermons and they called me things like a prostitute for just driving a car.
bahrain clashes with riot police global voices.
My son came to my room.
tololy from jordan was also busy building her own snowbabe she explains.
in this video below you can see the arrest of some of the drivers and the cordial welcome they had at the police station.
so it turns out that the kemerovo oblast administration doesn t have any money for sick children but to support newlyweds obsessed with numbers it s got money.
He asked us to help him.
Tom can't decide whether to buy a new computer now or wait for a couple of more months.
rosa longed for a world where justice would not be sacrificed in the name of freedom nor freedom sacrificed in the name of justice.
We don't have enough money to buy everything we need.
Where were you?
sugar cubes will also be blogging that day and suggests topics.
brazil electoral propaganda waste global voices.
I dug a pit.
us troops rendering honors to the republic of korea navy destroyer roks photo us navy on flickr cc by nc nd.
You'd better not eat too much.
Tom was Mary's first love.
what you have achieved in your term.
Don't do it!
i was very relieved when i heard that rafsanjani was disqualified is it funny that they disqualified the chairman of the expediency discernment council of iran they council of guardians are really stupid and this stupidity makes us happy and hopeful.
you may have missed out on the fumbling around with the translation headsets but if you weren t able to join us for the first day of the global voices citizen media summit in santiago chile you definitely have not missed out on the global conversation.
When did you come?
the song is written by ah p from a group called my little airport.
I have a friend in England.
In Japan, it rains quite a bit during our rainy season which is from mid-June until mid-July.
egypt another bloody week in syria global voices.
in september ayman nour of al ghad party and no man goma a of new wafd party nominated themselves against president hosni mubarak nour was charged with fraud and goma a was accused of insanity.
re publica berlin may.
mozambique photos of bike taxis in quelimane global voices.
yemen open letter to president abd rabbuh mansur al hadi global voices.
dr lwegasha s claim appears to be based on global who data for which shows that viral hepatitis is becoming more prevalent globally causing million deaths in comparable with tuberculosis deaths and exceeding deaths from hiv which amounted to approximately million worldwide.
these cartoon web cops named jingjing and chacha the word jing cha means police in chinese will apparently be patrolling websites originating in the southern chinese city of shenzhen according to the public security official interviewed by the beijing youth daily their real function is to remind internet users that the chinese police are watching people online no differently than offline in other words don t do anything online that you wouldn t do in a physical public place in china.
nick macwilliam from sounds and colours browsed the online store amazon to see what s readily available for those who are interested in the subject of street art in latin america he recommends books on the subject covering haiti brazil chile uruguay colombia mexico argentina and more.
why don t muslims use toilet paper.
rising voices featured guide creating facebook pages with impact arabic.
on january touati posted on youtube and on his blog alhogra a video interview with hassan kaabia the israeli foreign ministry s spokesperson for arabic speaking media the interview focused on the public response to the finance law which includes an increase in value added income and property taxes and a decrease in fuel subsidies when the law went into effect on january strikes and riots erupted in the northern province of bejaia and other parts of the country.
"What time is it?" "It's 3:20."
Your problem is similar to mine.
shamsheer writes in somewhereinblog about the floating markets he visited.
for more information about catherine ashcroft s work with syrian refugees in jordan visit the helping refugees in jordan facebook page.
Let's play something.
What are you doing?
My sister is shorter than you.
Tom and Mary don't live in the same state.
this video was produced filmed and edited for ensia by emily kinskey a documentary filmmaker and multimedia journalist currently based in erbil iraq her work focuses on underreported and persecuted subcultures and is characterized by collaborative videography and innovative multimedia techniques that assists oppressed communities in framing their narrative.
I began to cry.
leila abu saba writes about how readers find their way to her blog.
uae based journalist hassan hassan storfies how iranian translators distorted egyptian president mohammed morsi s speech at the non aligned movement meeting in tehran replacing syria with bahrain and arab spring with islamic awakening.
Be careful when you cross a road.
bolivia anti us rhetoric harming its diplomatic relations global voices.
what is your day to day life like.
as a heavy user of sheremetyevo airport i recommend checking out the president putin t shirt vending machine.
I was happy then.
How much is this clock?
the overall number of park s problematic tweets is which is only about per cent of his entire tweets in his trial these tweets were depicted as an expression of an agreement with the enemy s referring to north korea propaganda and were accused of promoting the enemy s messages.
It's crowded, so let's take the next train.
I said I'm sorry.
my body does not matter to the world.
Better late than never.
I heard an unusual noise.
the sagamihara massacre and the national dialogue or lack of it highlights how disabled people are often ignored in japanese society local police have also implemented a publication ban on the names of the victims all of whom were disabled making it harder to discuss the murders at the sagamihara care home.
couvrez et laissez mijoter a feu doux pendant environ h ajoutez les truffes dans la marmite min environ avant la fin de la cuisson.
our middle east and north africa editor amira al hussaini is going to be editing the website with help from other global voices editors and volunteers check in regularly at voices without votes until americans finally hit the polls and elect a president in november.
Are you in a relationship?
hong kong activists condemn cairo massacre global voices.
I don't know.
Is this the first time for you to have Japanese food?
africa celebrating humanity through photos and videos global voices.
He hasn't come yet.
bonn germany photo by annie zaman.
You always tell me that.
saudi journalist hamza kashgari was stopped at malaysia s airport after saudi arabia ordered his arrest the journalist is accused of sending a twitter message that insulted prophet mohammad.
an eyeshot of kabul capital of afghanistan and the country s largest city with a population of about million kabul province is the only province in the country with a larger urban than rural population photo by aaquib khan.
bamboo houses.
Books are my best friends.
There are many shrines in Kyoto.
preparation of its every page takes about three hours after the news is received in english from its part time reporters it is translated into urdu and katibs writers dedicated to the ancient art of urdu calligraphy pen down the whole story on paper after that negative copy of the entire hand written paper is prepared and pressed on printing plates.
Please tell me how I can get in touch with him.
forzaq explains.
That house is big.
walking past this with my wife en route to le parc des buttes chaumont is one of my happiest memories rip mr niemeyer http www flickr com photos atelier flir.
You must do your duty.
algeria.
blogueiras negras also adds a list of inspiring black women online from around the world.
hong wrong com posted some historical photos collected by life magazine showing mainland chinese refugees fleeing from the famine to hong kong in as a result of the great leap forward in mainland china.
with only percent of the world s population latin america accounts for percent of its homicides making it the planet s deadliest continent around million people have been murdered in the region since the start of this century more deaths than in all of the world s wars in the same period.
Parents love their children.
gvmeetup in cairo.
All you need to do is wait.
nicaragua real and hypothetical twitter updates about politicians global voices.
why do estonians take the front seat when sitting down in a taxi van.
I'm going to teach you how to fish next Sunday.
abu mahmoud a year old cab driver explains.
hala al jurayed from saudi arabia congratulated qatar on its win.
Is this your first visit to Japan?
the competition will follow the following timeline process.
let it be let s continue our china dream.
over the course of his brief life piermario morosini suffered many hardships the site meltybuzz fr remembers fr.
Come on. Let's go home.
Do you have an appointment?
a final word comes from the mass media tim blair who blogs for sydney s daily telegraph made his opinion of iran s president ahmadinejad quite clear.
That's enough.
reactions to the price increase.
the global privacy community lost two of its fiercest advocates in the past two weeks british privacy activist caspar bowden who had fought to ensure global privacy rights for all passed away on july turkish activist dr ozgur uckan a co founder digital rights group alternatif bilisim passed away on july both will be sorely missed.
Why is she angry?
jmf you said at the screening that it was a very hopeful time for caribbean film where do you see the industry going in the region.
i intend to keep posting information about onagawa my home town i ask that you retweet it as much as possible please stop following me if you don t want to see this kind of information if you re a fellow local with a question please send me a direct mail i will answer from within what i ve seen so far.
the term could be more complicated for different kinds of works for example even though the majority of arab countries protect photographs for the same duration as books some countries provide a shorter term of protection for photographs that is calculated from the moment the photograph is taken or published.
It's incredible.
Which one of those is yours?
google news us appalled by disgraceful un school shelling.
the arab observer from jordan posts a letter he got from a reader who discovered that her husband was gay.
angelina needs to stick to the topics she knows about ei ruining marriages stealing husbands adopting children from around the world wearing blood instead she chose the ironic path of a peace ambassador that gets involved in politics she knows nothing about and creates movies that will only create more hatred.
greek society is gradually realizing that racism is a threat and must be confronted.
don t be upset we ll execute you legally.
The kids are asleep.
palestinian blogger haitham sabbah discusses female genital mutilation in egypt and other african countries this post.
checkdesk from meedan.
memes widely shared in solidarity with the victims of the paris attacks.
the question of the arts in times of siege and occupation is one of the main themes in gaza s newest theatre production film cinema which opened on august in gaza city a stage buried in film negatives and adorned with a lone plump teddy bear sets the scene of the three person play.
I had my money stolen.
Did anyone call me while I was out?
indonesia s first breastfeeding video animation global voices.
I'll never let you go.
I went there yesterday.
moreover the author who identifies as a feminist makes no apologies for departing from the airy worlds created by classical children s authors such as hans christian anderson whose style of writing she still admires.
He's crazy about you.
caeo i wouldn t say transformed the police continue doing the same work as ever it is true though that the number of people applying to the police has grown considerably given the lack of job opportunities.
vagabondeuse writes of a german family denied entry into australia because their son has down s syndrome.
He let us go.
documentary in portuguese with spanish subtitles why does anita garibaldi want desafioanita.
I'm leaving you tomorrow.
aleksandr gorbachev a former afisha chief editor who now works for meduza was annoyed by a new york times piece titled why men want to marry melanias and raise ivankas every time i read something like this i hope trump wins the journalist concluded in a facebook post alexey kovalev later added that america deserves trump because the us democratic media is so unconvincing.
It's time for you to buy a new car.
How can you know that?
my name is rawan gharib i am one of the arabic lingua editors based in cairo i am also an author with a focus on latin america middle east cultural nodes i have also had the recent privilege of working with rising voices on the mother language meme challenge campaign.
The dragon is an imaginary creature.
"How old are you?" "I'm 16 years old."
i m not getting pranked or anything but the internet just sucks for a whole week afterward you don t know what the hell is real or not.
bob morris fondly remembers what anguilla s most famous citizen taught him about the unspeakable joy of a good sea bath.
vice president joseph butore said it was the will of the people and president nkurunziza promised it is god s will to free burundi from foreign colonizers for a better future he encouraged supporters to vote freely although officials also warned against sabotaging the vote and told people to report suspects to police.
My father made a shelf for me.
the uae has moved to adopt new amendments to its anti terrorism law providing a death sentence for those found guilty of terror related crimes such as attacking and threatening uae rulers and conspiring against the state and government.
fears of ticket hikes as china scraps indebted railways ministry global voices.
mohammed yousif who tweets jawazsafar adds.
The cat which you found is mine.
Don't tell anyone this.
Paris is the capital of France.
although unlikely should russia s decryption project succeed it could endanger millions of internet users whose interest in online anonymity is far from nefarious.
May I share this table with you?
egypt.
Don't leave me alone.
Let me know when you get that report back from Tom.
They gave it to me.
while on a trip to jeju lababidi got sick and wound up in an emergency room doctors diagnosed him with crohn s disease an inflammatory bowel condition he says it flares up whenever he gets stressed out and that seems to happen whenever he leaves jeju island.
area.
paco shared his year long prison ordeal.
Don't forget the ticket.
the committee to protect bloggers is back global voices.
toronto canada photo by mahsa alimardani.
Tom is a French teacher.
I was late because of the rain.
He reads a good deal.
No one lives here anymore.
Is your school far from your home?
I wrote to Tom yesterday.
at global voices we re all over the place help us keep it that way global voices.
She likes running.
Where did you meet Tom?
When do we eat?
What are you talking about?
many brazilians are expressing concerns that the death of justice zavascki might derail operation carwash mr zavascki had been the official responsible for deciding when to bring charges against sitting politicians who can only be tried in the supreme court under brazilian law.
global voices summit checked out the summit program as yet.
it is now normal for individuals to think twice or more before deciding how to say something and when to say it and to calculate the consequences without realizing it they are practicing what digital security researchers call threat modeling weighing the impact of their choices in public spheres as well as private ones.
china needs to be cool in this highly complicated situation decisions should be based on national interest reducing the risk to chinese society.
martin malena and the guagua transhumante on the pacific coast heading to quito ecuador photo shared publicly on facebook.
mir hussein moussavi the main challenger of ahmadinejad said the results from untrustworthy monitors reflect the weakening of the pillars that constitute the sacred system of iran and the rule of authoritarianism and tyranny several scenes of street fights and demonstrations are uploaded on youtube.
I've spoken to your teachers.
if politics do not forbid the deadly trade of weapons then we must find a creative way to prosecute the perpetrators for al capone it was tax evasion that finally did him in the criminal code is long.
i am living in a country where the only thing i get is a veil i am living in a country where you look at me as somebody to sleep with i am living in a country where in its most secure and cultured place a woman gets violated.
abu dhabi authorities are educating mothers about legalities and the most common offences youth commit including those under the uae cybercrime law.
but the transcript of the speech on the presidential website confirmed it and so the belarusians took to the task with gusto.
Go and speak to my colleague.
syria the free women of darayya global voices.
I have your diary.
He continued walking for a while.
tribute to his fight for internet freedom and for dignity.
a photo album by antonio silva on sapo illustrates the widespread use of bicycles as taxis in the flat city of quelimane in mozambique a place where there the lack of public transports has opened the path for a healthier environment.
It's a good deal.
Tell me what the matter is.
All Tom really needed was about ten dollars.
the breaking borders award is a new prize created by google and global voices and supported by thomson reuters to honor outstanding web projects initiated by individuals or groups that demonstrate courage energy and resourcefulness in using the internet to promote freedom of expression.
in these troubled times the world perhaps needs a bit of cheer and what better than the bright sparkling colors of holi the festival of spring to renew our optimism hopes and joy.
I have to go now.
so i m still in egypt still at the same school same friends same street etc it s the year the year when the zionist army finally left the lebanese soil except for shebaa farms because of the amazing lebanese resistance.
Do your own work.
two out of every three mexican citizens reported that was better for them personally than according to a national poll writes vivir mexico es.
Driving too fast is dangerous.
Please shuffle the cards carefully.
This bridge was built two years ago.
Tom isn't ready yet.
nagoul a massacre is taking place in tahrir right now egypt noscaf mediablackout.
I am a student.
Hurry!
troubling perceptions of climate change.
queen rania al abdullah of jordan is now on twitter catch up with her tweets here.
Have you done your homework?
when the city fell under siege in november most of the women were forced to leave darayya many returned months later to find their town devastated and its people massacred this did not prevent them from resuming their work focusing on the huge amount of people in need of food and assistance while several of its members faced detention by the regime.
I'm sure Tom would never do something like that.
al sharif says her campaign women drive continues to push the limits of what s socially acceptable in saudi arabia in the coming months her memoir daring to drive will also be published in arabic.
It's an indisputable matter.
I've made my decision.
The fact that Britain had no national anthem before 1745 is in itself of little consequence.
zeinab from egypt joins the campaign.
the next year as the syrian uprising erupted al halabi watched with suspense from his television screen because i had lived in damascus and some of the areas most affected by the revolution i had to produce art i do not have the power to do anything though i can just look and show what is happening through another lens he told syriauntold.
jordan architectural censorship global voices.
the following is a version of a partner post from eurasianet org originally titled kyrgyzstan children s literature taking fresh look at old fables republished with permission.
I love lasagna.
agostini prepares for a shot.
I don't know if he would have done it for me.
through the lens of bloggers flickr users and communities and contributors on youtube we offer you an online tour of the art of the streets that communicate secrets and passions at every turn.
iran immigration and iranian family global voices.
information about any health conditions.
I'm freezing.
digital citizen is brought to you by advox access eff social media exchange and iber com this month s report was researched edited and written by afef abrougui jessica dheere michael fuchs courtney radsch thalia rahme and jillian c york and translated into arabic by lara al malakeh and french by thalia rahme.
When did you begin studying English?
read the first chapter of daring to drive here.
I was laughed at by him.
mambo rafiki yangu.
Put the carrots in the pot.
Please speak more loudly.
libya protests against gaddafi start ahead of schedule global voices.
luis florido luisflorido august.
twitter users cesar ponce cesarponcec and paola yosoypao exchange views about the actual willingness of the government to dialogue.
bahrain bloggers code of ethics against sectarianism global voices.
china is set to pass the united states in numbers of skyscrapers according to motiancity a research organization in china currently there are skyscrapers in china under construction and in planning by the number of skyscrapers in china will reach compared to in the us.
I have no choice but to do everything they've told me to do.
Don't ask me for money.
It's a nice day.
He tried writing a short story.
I heard an unusual noise.
razan zeitouneh.
turkey s first mosque designed by a woman was opened in istanbul writes emre k z lkaya.
It was very weird.
I find it difficult to believe.
I remember hearing a very similar story to that.
there are many organizations in caracas trying to change things for the better global voices.
She left him for another man.
The dispute was finally settled.
dango and fish skewers.
This book is new.
a prominent women s rights activist noted in the statement that both the presidential and local elections are critical the outcome of the presidential elections would impact ongoing change in support of women s rights on a national level while local elections would offer an opportunity to further foster women s public participation across iran s city and village councils.
the hack in nairobi june.
How many times do I need to repeat it?
nepal an appeal to the maoists global voices.
Madrid is the capital of Spain.
He is a wolf in sheep's clothing.
in the coming months once the award is signed we look forward to working closely with the gv community to build this project if you re interested in hearing more drop me a note or send a comment to this post to kick off a discussion at present we ve started with a short brainstorming meeting with sands fish a good friend of gv who works with ethan at the mit media lab and will be working with us to design and build the media cloud tools and integration.
uae googling what global voices.
It wasn't easy to solve this problem.
birthday presents are welcome too so if you d like to support our work please consider a donation or purchase some of the nsa themed christmas cards designed by our friends at paper chase press of the proceeds go to us.
I don't know whether she will come.
blogger iqbal tamimi posts rare photographs of nazareth city in palestine which go back to.
this guy already needed to be on his way out of moscow and he d only come to his senses at the last minute by this time the driver with all his stuff was on the other side of the city alexander said in the end he had to put the pedal to the metal to reach him but he pulled it off and got a handsome tip.
chinese media have welcomed the break up of the ministry china daily commented.
I worked on the farm all day.
Give me something to eat.
How I've missed you!
equality and justice.
yemen tedxsanaa website launched global voices.
I keep sneezing.
ali amiri added fa.
do of muslim high school students believe it is acceptable to take up arms for their religion no global voices newsframes.
When did Tom graduate from college?
Every house had a garden.
Where will we meet?
Do you have a violin?
such discussion concerning blogs has not been unique to iran it shows that many authorities do not only wish to filter blogs but also to eliminate bloggers.
Most people think I'm crazy.
locations of the ahwar of southern iraq world heritage site source unesco click on the map to see the full interactive map at pri org.
You're not going to like what I'm going to say.
She gave me a present.
the problem with everything is the funds and with the crisis enveloping every corner of the earth the implementation of technology in these centers goes from being extremely limited to totally absent.
What do they want?
I like Tom because he's honest.
He was laid off.
get to know mohamed elgohary multitasking global voices contributor global voices.
You broke my heart.
syria prior to the war had reasonably robust and growing communications technology with access to mass media networks satellite tv internet and mobile data access to those technologies gave syrians the tools both to communicate among themselves and to connect with the rest of the world enough remnants of those networks exist now to allow people in conflict zones to continue sharing information despite the war or perhaps because of it syrian citizen media networks with increasing knowledge and skill have been a major conduit for the documentation of the war.
the san cristobal volcano erupted at am on september in nicaragua image by ricci rich silva via twitpic.
uzbekistan silk and spice festival lost in translation global voices.
sao paulo will host the world social forum on migrations global voices.
She rides her bike to school.
why hasn t algeria recognised kosovo global voices.
I thought this was common knowledge.
riemer brouwer updates us on the political situation in lebanon in this post.
Maybe you should turn off the television and do something else.
I live in this hotel.
China is rich in natural resources.
I have a stomachache.
Let me go alone.
ethan zuckerman photo by joi ito cc by.
image from bugu ene illustrated by dzum gunn permission provided by altyn kapalova.
saudi arabia qatif protestor shot global voices.
cambodia s freedom park political cartoon by sacravatoons.
Don't get so angry.
I'm not sure if I like this one or that one.
hatefest turns hateful.
on october the nobel prize in literature was awarded to american singer and musician bob dylan for having created new poetic expressions within the great american song tradition.
run by young reporters of the year old colombian newspaper el espectador la pulla delves into complex topics by combining hard analyzes with a raw sense of humor while designed primarily with young colombians in mind the channel resonated with followers of all ages inside and outside the south american country.
the director of news site badil info hamid mahdaoui is facing trial over the publication of a breaking news story on the explosion of a car in a neighborhood in meknes a city in northern morocco he stands accused of publishing false news over and publishing an unlicensed newspaper his trial is set to take place on may.
I don't know if I'll have time to do it.
This medicine will relieve your headache.
blogger iqbal tamimi posts rare photographs of the palestinian nakba of.
pestiside hu reports about uncorroborated rumours that libyan leader muammar gaddafi s wife safiya is from bosnia with origins in hungary.
save iphone battery kill wifi kill gps kill push notifications kill bluetooth turn down brightness shut down extraneous apps.
africa an african voice telling the african story global voices.
Is that a yes or no?
You should keep your desk clean.
egyptian activist and blogger arabawy shares similar sentiments and here are messages click on image below he twittered to the queen.
That's a relief.
why are syrians fleeing to europe.
She sat next to me.
My uncle came to see me.
I didn't see the need for it.
She will be late for dinner.
if you would like to make dacic palma photo montages here s the photo layer with a transparent background.
the ivanov report addresses factors forging russian foreign policy under medvedev.
You can do it.
Raise your hand.
alexander says he often argues in online forums with drivers who cheat their passengers he thinks deceiving the clients is a disgrace.
this post is part of our special coverage mexico s drug war.
You're forgiven.
Tufts University is a very famous school in Boston.
You should cut down on the amount of fattening food that you eat.
We can't wait much longer.
When does it end?
our ideal candidate will.
graffiti art of surveillance camera published and labeled for reuse on pixabay.
vietnamese blogger ta phong tan was released from prison after serving three years of a year sentence she was arrested on anti state charges for her work reporting on corruption and abuse within the police and court systems.
professor v v subramaniam presented a lecture demonstration on how the essence of music is interpreted and performed on the violin.
I'm afraid it's unavoidable.
Can I speak to the person in charge?
in other words this conflict is still far from reaching a conclusion wrote journalist elaine tavares on the brasil de fato website.
tunisian bloggers have formed a facebook group ar entitled censorship tarnishes my country s reputation.
can the same facebook contact add an application called the latest hunk and within the same day join a group called proud to be a muslim asks hani obaid from jordan.
I came to Japan last year.
an egyptian chose to boycott and be romantic with an i love you sara ballot image by qoutb twitter.
You should get your car fixed.
el mekki himself was the target of such abuse throughout january as anti austerity protesters took to the street the government responded with a heavy hand with police detaining and harassing several journalists while they were doing their work on january el mekki and mosaique fm radio host boubaker ben akecha invited a member of the journalists union to discuss the issue.
regsprecher is stability in the gulf more important than the lives and freedom of the people there tank euro.
What's for lunch?
That feast was one of the best I ever had.
i m totally sick of it i hear it a lot why not the usa or japan.
many have already heard of the french urban artist invadera who based much of his art on a particular arcade game in the late s and left his mark on urban artists throughout europe his then unusual form of artistic expression street art balanced on a high wire between guerilla activism and mainstream art.
May I eat this cake?
china drinking deer blood global voices.
they were right if the men on site were willing to beat me up to please their boss they would certainly lie for him and i was sealed in no one from the street could witness how they had repeatedly assaulted me.
ghodosi explained to mehr news agency an organisation owned by the islamic dissemination organisation on july that the status of the game in iran would depend on the game developer s cooperation with authorities.
I would like you to meet a friend of mine.
Did you pay for the book?
Are you sure you know how to do this?
lebanon.
ankursays gurgaon was once a proud symbol our country devlopment now the whole ncr has become a shame symbol rape destination our country.
worth reading.
I met Tom in the library on Monday.
egypt.
the second video features the mokattam blog tales project led by nesma gewily who has been working with young people from the mokattam area of cairo with storytelling and photography workshops.
elia saikaly s short movie catches the majestic beauty of mount everest at night in time lapse.
I'm not feeling well.
I've never climbed Mt. Fuji.
paris france elise.
I bet everyone is waiting.
You must gather further information.
for more photos from colombia you can also visit humans of bogota a page created in august by john cardona and jonathan arevalo.
I want to try this.
eiffel tower not that big global voices.
according to users the problems are intermittent and are preventing them from entering their dashboards and their own blogs also they have said that it s possible to access blogger using the alternative google s dns when the problem presents.
Those flowers have died.
michael ardaiolo from shanghaiist has collected a set of photoshop meme circulated via weibo in china on north korean leader kim jong un.
the previous government however granted licenses to gold mining companies along the confluence after the relocation process the irrawaddy visited this area earlier this month and found that some companies are still digging for gold despite an official ban.
russia saudi arabia hajj quotas cut again global voices.
He must be from the South.
Do you have any idea who would do this?
follow our in depth coverage gaza civilian death toll mounts in israeli offensive.
What's the matter?
I'm a bit hungry.
we re now collecting the names of those arrested if anybody knows someone captured please leave a comment with his name freedomforthegoodpeople.
It's time to get up.
damascus remains throbbing wounds insanity of poetry tears in her hands sword s caravan and many other poems and reflections on women human beings war heroism and the world by ibrahim shakarneh from nahalin village in palestine can be found on his blog.
khat wine is just as good as any wine produced from grapes and has been well received by wine drinkers eyasu who said he had sent out tester bottles to consumers told reporters.
Tom converted his bedroom into an office.
Tom sold his house.
It's fairly warm today.
the stockholm internet forum october stockholm sweden.
the website maroc senego com recalls fr other sudden deaths of high profile athletes in recent years.
remember the basics.
the lands occupied by the quilombo rio dos macacos was donated by the city hall of salvador to the brazilian navy in mid at the time the existence of inhabitants was registered pt and the navy was made responsible for any compensation that might arise from the transfer of land.
Will you go to America next month?
in his blog afkar mazyar writes fa that according to reports this worker had not been paid for a year and security forces escorted him out immediately the blogger adds.
Where's your sister?
uae iranian translators distort morsi s speech global voices.
iraq m a day global voices.
chicago illinois us.
Do you know which one of those guys is Tom?
renowned ethiopian journalist and blogger eskinder nega was found guilty by an ethiopian court for participation in a terrorist organisation and for inciting terrorism via his blog nega was one of activists convicted under the country s anti terrorism laws which have been criticized for being used as a means to silence dissent he could face life in prison.
I remember giving him the key.
The city was destroyed by fire.
vagla a popular polish digital rights blogger shared this hope pl on twitter on january.
Don't read in this room.
the exchange of comments even became hostile towards arabic culture and muslims one particular remark reads.
I can't remember the tune of that song.
I used to love swimming.
Put the book where you found it.
he adds.
That's what we've always used.
One must do one's best.
a platform for middle east s indie musicians global voices.
Be serious.
iran a new magazine was banned global voices.
russia initially intervened on the pretext of fighting isis yet over of russian bombs have fallen nowhere near territory controlled by the terror group instead they fall on communities which have self organised in democratic local councils on schools and hospitals which doctors and teachers are desperately trying to keep functioning on volunteer relief workers who risk their lives to pull terrified and bloodied children from rubble.
Let me do it.
You need to stop smoking.
on twitter users have expressed their concern.
neurotic iraqi wife shares with us things she hates about her colleagues at work in the enclosed green zone.
syria photos of chemical weapons global voices.
laisser mijoter minutes puis finir la cuisson sans le couvercle pour laisser le ragout reduire un peu a minutes.
imshin from israel takes a trip to jerusalem and reports his findings here.
mali citizens stunned by sudden military coup global voices.
oc paraguay blog day is financed with a lot of blood sweat and wifi signals from a few who believe that information and the power of ideas can change reality transforming it through other needed viewpoints there is no financing from the state and the private companies that do join collaborate only symbolically and at many stages the event is not funded production merchandising speakers and so on with all of this we still don t charge for admission this year you can also follow the event via live stream.
She swindled him.
I would like to know her name.
user naticle acknowledges this concern but added ko.
Bangkok is the capital of Thailand.
Tom went inside the apartment.
of course this element of the equation is not unique to egypt the security and intelligence community in the country are using the same set of justifications used everywhere we are fighting extremism we are in a war on terrorism you have nothing to hide we are using it only with bad people and of course they are fascinated by the surveillance capabilities used by top intelligence agencies like those within the five eyes.
doctors of dnipropetrovsk regional clinical hospital named after ilya ilyich mechnikov photo by dnipropetrovsk regional hospital.
these operations often take place at night or at dawn without forewarning and under heavy police presence not only are refugees homes taken away but all too often their belongings are also confiscated and various instances of police brutality against forced migrants including minors have been reported.
bangladesh photos of kite festival and fire eaters in dhaka global voices.
uganda wants a strong local content in the nascent oil and gas industry for its citizens to gain skilled manpower and a competitive supply edge this is in an attempt to ensure revenues trickles down averting the resource curse.
You can do it.
crackdown on algeria s christian community global voices.
emojis depicting mapuche culture republished with permission.
opponents of the amendment are divided though those remaining in burundi largely back no although some dissenters back yes meanwhile exiled opposition members centered around the national council for the respect of the arusha accord and the peace and reconciliation of burundi cnared support a boycott some supporters in exile express frustration with these divisions.
I smell something burning, Mother.
malaysia former prime minister undergoing heart surgery global voices.
this list won most of the votes in sidi bouzid hajlaoui was freed on december as emna el hammi from the collective blog nawaat reports fr.
that itself is ok.
a tour around some of the archeological findings of the expansion of the panama canal such as bottles weapons.
that was followed by literaturealiveonline ca an online resource for teachers and learners about canadian caribbean literature that accompanied our part documentary series literature alive.
history repeats itself.
turkey riot police continue to clash with kurds celebrating newroz global voices.
One of us will have to go.
on gigaom matthew ingram reacted to news of ethan s appointment by asking whether mit will be helping to re invent local media as news media struggle to survive in the digital age.
belarusian internet users stripped in their workplaces to respond to the president s call to put more effort into their work image from instagram.
announcing the winners of the breaking borders award global voices.
picture tweeted by jiyanazadi.
imagine traveling kilometers by motorized canoe in search of a rival for a sporting match that is what the young footballers from the kichwa community of sarayaku in the ecuadorian amazon must do every week for regular competition.
I'll ask when the train will get in.
We should keep this information under wraps for the time being.
subscribe to the netizen report by email.
Tom couldn't hold back his tears.
Where is the mistake?
I'm only a customer.
What time is it?
on the secrecy of the trial zenobia wrote.
i am the first coptic egyptian that will run for the presidential elections after meeting all the requirements prescribed for nomination to this post which is the first top post in egypt he said.
How far is it from here?
some uber drivers trick their customers alexander warns they arrive turn on their meter and only then call the client but the rules say they re supposed to wait to activate the meter until after they call the client.
as runet echo reported in october the june law is already forcing some russian companies to adopt new compliance measures yandex a russian search engine and news aggregator has been forced to change its information sharing policy and agreements with its partner media companies.
fonzy thinks the law is unfair with deportation being too strict a punishment he notes.
these eight pandas are beijing residents now she writes after having been flown there to their new home at the beijing zoo following the earthquake.
Let's get ready to go.
War suddenly broke out.
Kindly mind your own business.
Tom is absent.
bahraini rights activist ebtisam al saegh charged under terrorism law global voices.
but with a number of electoral lists exceeding and a number of candidates estimated at there are plenty of things to laugh about in this year s election race including the logos names and mottos of electoral lists.
She'll do it in 24 hours.
jordan doctor lawyer joke global voices.
What do I have to do now that I'm registered?
The game isn't over yet.
Tom is my hostage.
The population of China is larger than that of Japan.
nm so how exactly are you trying to get african voices and stories heard.
We reached London at midnight.
check out some of the awesome inceptionist images generated by ostagram users below or better yet register on the website and create your own.
She didn't even try to do the right thing.
Though I was tired, I did my best.
window on eurasia writes that according to a kremlin adviser more than half of the population of the russia will be muslim in.
See you again.
i ve always tried to embrace the concept of peace beginning with me so when i edited a story about a video of a mother hitting her own child that went viral last week i was sad the story was our most popular published post in april.
I have a weird neighbor.
kuwait remembering chernobyl global voices.
gv and puerto rico how does being from an island inspire or ruin you.
another twitter user in the city of karaj described feeling happy that pokemon had given him an excuse to go outside and move.
Mastering a foreign language isn't easy.
He came back from America.
Take off your socks, please.
I'm pleased to meet you.
but such rapid development may come at a cost as twitter user bluebird put it.
alex michael writes.
moreover according to cultural policy expert professor donka bardzieva phd the citizens could not know that the painted objects have been declared as items of cultural heritage because they had not been properly marked according to article of the law on protection of cultural heritage the ministry of culture was obliged by law to properly mark them within days of giving them such status in addition according to article of that law the minister and her underlings are obliged to pay a fine of to euros to us dollars for non compliance.
When was the last time you rode a bike?
video tips to make your videos better global voices.
the spring festival or lunar new year is china s most important holiday for family reunions according to the ministry of transportation around million train trips are estimated to be made during this year s spring festival which runs from january to february.
paddling against pollution one man s mission to protect iraq s rivers for future generations global voices.
tb wikipedia for example offers content in certain african languages dont fula peul and bambara bamanankan a language very close to malinke maninka furthermore afripedia has been developed in collaboration with the institut francais and the francophone university association since june.
Control yourselves.
cabanellas palace dome photo lu fpj cc by nc sa.
Wait just a moment.
read about global voices participation in the storymaker project.
Tom went quickly up the stairs.
iran s internet under hassan rouhani hope and disillusionment as narenji bloggers face prison sentence global voices advox.
if you re wandering around say sao paulo brazil or athens greece or san francisco california you just might stumble upon a weed grown as tall as a building on the building that is.
I bought every book on Japan I could find.
now they re even making it difficult for us to stick to tradition yerba.
there are doubts however about the fairness of the upcoming vote to help monitor the violations of the electoral process bulgarian activists have created several online tools.
May I use your telephone?
along the way she lost a shoe.
earlier this month morar lj user natmorar had a bizarre experience at istanbul international ataturk airport which she has described rus on her blog.
a photo of a mexican revolutionary who looks like manny pacquiao has gone viral few days before the filipino boxing icon s fight today against floyd mayweather in las vegas for three champions belts omb cmb y la amb in the welterweight division.
Please hold on.
as well as grassroots efforts there are pr companies who work closely with online campaigns for non profits and activist groups boyd neil is svp and national practice leader for social media and digital communications at hill knowlton strategies in canada he says getting the social web right is difficult.
What happened here?
washington dc usa.
but access to huge online archives of information about the war doesn t guarantee that it is organized or presented in ways that accord with our expectations of war reporting that s because information in modern conflict isn t simply about impartially reporting the facts as they occur information instead is part of the battle for perception about the war and its combatants that in turn forms opinions about who is just and moral who is worth supporting politically or with resources and who will be a target of attack.
I play with him.
You look bored.
I don't have a problem with this.
You're crazy.
You can't live without oxygen.
Visit us tomorrow.
It is so early.
a caricature by palestinian artist hani abbas that reads the country belongs to those who defend it taken from the artist s facebook page.
even though she is just years old yasmine bouchene has already created two webzines jam mag fr on geek culture and new technologies and vinyculture a cultural webzine now she wants to establish a company dedicated to marketing and communications for yasmine black irony has become a daily sport.
year old citizen journalist killed covering clashes in syria global voices.
Why did you leave your job on the farm?
climate change march at the vatican on june photo by flickr user ecosikh cc by nc sa.
i gave up he says when asked if he s kept track of all the times he s been detained and questioned it is absolutely insane the amount of times i ve been stopped.
hossein ronaghi maleki picture uploaded to twitter after his release on bail.
on the contrary what excites you as a journalist.
What's important is not the goal, but the journey.
That's just a personal opinion.
lebanon mothers against bush global voices.
afghanistan argentina australia azerbaijan bahrain bangladesh belarus bolivia brazil bulgaria canada china colombia czechoslovakia egypt france germany ghana greece hong kong hungary india indonesia iran iraq italy japan kenya kyrgyzstan lebanon macedonia madagascar mauritania mexico mozambique myanmar nepal new zealand nigeria pakistan peru philippines poland portugal russia saint lucia sao tome and principe serbia south korea spain switzerland taiwan tanzania thailand trinidad and tobago tunisia turkey turkmenistan uganda ukraine united kingdom united states venezuela.
Everybody is waiting for you.
the recent national youth poll found that many youth in mexico city would not accept having a homosexual as a neighborhoor or live with someone with hiv aids vivir mexico es takes a look at these findings and writes we have a lot of work to do.
whatever can be said about the new security plan in iraq it has not come without cost the new iraqi army can hardly be called non sectarian zeyad posts a video showing iraqi security forces raiding a small town in iraq in a scene reminiscent of saddam s violent quelling of an uprising in he writes.
we are not aware of any abuse by these companies facebook said but added that it is winding down access to them and has already ended of its partnerships the report raises more questions about facebook s commitment to privacy protections in the wake of this spring s cambridge analytica scandal in which the data mining company used data from facebook beyond the boundaries of the two companies initial agreement.
hayatelyamani the military police broke into the place we were filming in at dawn and took our equipment and arrested three of my colleagues.
saudi arabia how a censored page looks like global voices.
His help is indispensable to us.
At last, I graduated from junior high school.
during this time of confinement the windows of my home became my favorite camera these wide openings in the walls gave me the chance to get closer to the social dynamics that i considered impenetrable part of the fascination with observing others lies in the questions that arise from this encounter with a foreign reality likewise the nature of the answers that emerge from such questions has the power to raise more unanswered questions.
I've decided to stay for a few more days.
Above all, be patient.
your donation will help sustain the efforts of our authors and translators who work around the clock to bring you updates from conflict areas natural disasters and from the frontline of battles for freedom of expression.
as we said on october it s been an amazing ten years both for us and for this planet in addition to having evolved into a vibrant volunteer driven community and newsroom that produces content into over languages and a leader in the fields of digital rights and online media development we ve built a remarkable record of the extraordinary lives of so called ordinary human beings at a point in history where rapid change seems to be one of the few constants.
on a related note kuwaiti officials have reportedly initiated talks with research in motion concerning blackberry s double encryption technology a feature that several gulf nations have pointed to as potentially harmful to national security.
you can see many other videos made by youngsters at adobe youth voices where you can search by location and learn not only about life in india but also about youth in senegal and south africa as well as the us canada and england.
the local blog posts a human rights watch report that states french police use broad powers to conduct abusive identity checks on black and arab young men and boys despite the absence of any evidence of wrongdoing human rights watch said on thursday.
Tom is playing frisbee.
in other news.
We must go there whether we like it or not.
an interesting video interview in spanish es is available in the mexican blog andamos armados.
nagoul i am three blocks away from where the action is it was very loud.
in these funerals the deceased is honored by their peers with music and rhythm cries liquor and gunshots into the air some of these funerals are shared on social media where participants show the beginning and sometimes the entirety of the procession.
and now for all our efforts and sacrifices put into creating a precious piece of country we are told that we are not a country after all it sounded vulgar sounded like a shirking of responsibility like a dereliction of duty.
you can participate until december st.
One year has twelve months.
donations to global voices help our worldwide community report stories that forge deep connections across cultures languages and differences of opinion work that s urgent as we seek to understand how to live harmoniously in a difficult global environment.
abdollah shabazi an islamist historian says fa that owners of the revolution according to the definition of the islamic republic leadership face a dilemma between either.
Are you planning to help them?
venezuela hugo chavez has died global voices.
The king governed the country.
amid widespread protests in response to venezuela s social political and economic crises state control over information has reached new heights.
photographs are appearing on flickr and elsewhere allowing us a glimpse beyond the visuals provided by mainstream media arun shanbhag has a post full of photographs from blood pools to chalk marks and a burning taj hotel more of his photographs on flickr here.
syria war crimes.
How old is your father?
Would you prefer to speak in French?
Any student can solve this problem.
The opera starts at seven.
the last surviving founder of architecture s modernist movement is still full of ideas for designs that have become even more daring concepts among his upcoming projects there is a new arts building for the spanish city of aviles he has revealed in interviews that although this project may only be ready in it is already one of his favorites designs.
He's a good person.
I am busy now.
bahrain who is ali abdulemam global voices.
the facebook group cyber arabs highlights ar a new malware for skype and other instant messaging services targeting syrian activists.
protesters sit down and lock arms in opposition to police presence photo by patrick gerhard soesser copyright demotix may.
the mufti religious leader of mount lebanon is a foul mouthed demagogue who needs to be demoted as soon as possible writes beirut spring from lebanon.
thank you milton.
escaped crocodile in siem reap photo from triple j mornings.
brazil real men don t beat women global voices.
as a result many members of the opposition ruling cndd fdd party dissenters and journalists fled abroad while others were internally displaced while thousands have returned since the united nations un has still registered refugees since at underfunded refugee camps ministers claim these figures are manipulated.
the internet freedom translathon is part of the summer of internet freedom a series of events taking place this august to encourage internet users to continue the global conversation about the role of the internet in our lives and how we can keep it free and open it is also a way to engage with the declaration and to show public support for internet freedom anyone can host offline or online events anywhere around the world.
Don't say such a thing.
using the internet for long distance calling is illegal punishable by jail or fine according to the article of the telecommunications law issued in this law is one of many flaws in the telecommunications law but even with that it is stated that protecting consumers interests is part of ntra s mission.
palestine journalist mohammed omer awarded then beaten global voices.
I asked him not to drive so fast.
be the change is a new website by civicus for people to share stories of their own activism in order to inspire others or seek helping hands.
It is their only choice.
since january online hackers calling themselves anonymous have been attacking and shuting down government websites almost constantly in a chaotic protest against the plans to sign the international treaty on thursday.
It's too hot.
global voices members win knight news challenge awards to strengthen the internet global voices.
What do you say to this plan?
introducing the clean internet.
I have trouble talking about my feelings.
Tom has been close.
It isn't here anymore.
I'm from Kyoto.
meanwhile boudourou is a common initiative led by some bloggers who criticize tunisia s traditional media and how media process the information in their arabic posts.
I don't know when he'll be here.
Soccer is the world's most popular sport.
He speaks Portuguese.
She is getting prettier and prettier.
It's very important to get enough rest.
the threat to our collective security extends to public health as well widespread fear has led to immigrants forgoing healthcare for themselves and even their u s citizen children increasing health risks for all ice s violence also has direct and tangible effects a study by the university of michigan documented health outcomes following a ice raid in iowa the study found that latina women including those who were u s citizens were more likely to give birth to low birth weight or premature babies following the raid.
we are all fruits of the womb and whatever a woman wants god wants it.
dan beekman at blogging beijing gives a roundup of beijing s environmental problems and its hopes he interviews ngo and student leaders about the green olympics one of the three themes of this year s games he s also recently interviewed mr wu dengming an environmental powerhouse from chongqing in middle china.
hospitals in buenos aires are getting their own patch adams clowns global voices.
stop your hunger strike majid i am not deserving of you to sacrifice your life for me if you would not be here i do not want the spring stay with us majid stay.
pesacheck investigated the claim that hepatitis causes more deaths than hiv in tanzania and found that the statement is false for the following reasons.
mohammad mosatfai an iranian lawyer informs fa us that iran has executed a year old woman delara darabi for a crime committed when she was a years old watch a video about delara and her paintings here.
She left her gloves in the car.
Please do what you consider necessary.
He is a genius.
public kiss in protest in rabat oct th.
Let's have some watermelon.
according to al badeel al iraqi their sources in sadr city sent a message saying that the attacking forces are preparing to hit the city with opiate fentanyl non lethal gas the same gas the russians used to attack the rebels in moscow theater in.
the city of my birth is hurting so i am hurting even though i have spent most of my adult life elsewhere i was back in nice around this time last year i did not visit the promenade des anglais where the tragedy occurred but i walked around the borough nearby and took in the beauty of the flower market and the view from the hillside.
the marshes today remain one of the poorest areas in iraq residents living on tiny floating islands fish tend water buffalo and gather reeds there is almost no health care and few schools.
documents leaked in early august by the anonymous twitter account gammagrouppr have confirmed previously made allegations that the bahraini government is using finfisher spyware sold by gamma international a german british surveillance company to spy on activists and politicians according to the same documents the bahraini government spied on two members of its own fact finding commission put in place to investigate human rights violations.
friday march is a a tragic day in yemen s history a date that is engraved in every yemenis memory better known as friday of karamah or the friday of dignity on this date back in security forces built a wall near change square in sanaa filled it with tyres and petrol and immediately after friday prayer they set it on flames to block the protesters this occurred as former president ali abdullah saleh s supporters posted on rooftops allies and houses opened fire on the massive march and caused an unprecedented atrocious and brutal bloodshed.
this youtube video shows the youth work actions that included volunteers of all ages that built the highway of brotherhood and unity connecting all six states of the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia the video includes footage of then yugoslav leader josip broz tito congratulating the volunteer workers on fulfilling their promise of getting the highway built in under a year and on schedule english subtitles included.
How are you doing?
He has a car.
You can come with me.
it seems from our guests in this edition are divided on what they made of the kony campaign but mostly united in the idea that the social web can help to amplify a message in a good way.
meanwhile the world is still talking are you listening.
Maybe we should take Tom with us.
Where is the station?
jordanian moey complains about the increase in alcohol prices in his country.
graffiti in times of crisis global voices.
There was only a little milk left in the bottle.
Everything will change.
stockholm based journalist and media researcher from jordan rami abdelrahman reflects on the program on a series of videos he uploaded on his blog rami s wall.
according to you tunisia is a republic a kingdom a zoo a prison or nothing.
more photos can be found on the flickr group mural paintings and graffiti in venezuela which is joined by more than members.
i wish i could say i do it perfectly but more importantly i do it for the responsibility i do it because writing allows me to make ecuador s presence known to the rest of the world not because the country doesn t have good journalists but rather because the reports in english are mainly written by foreigners that sometimes don t offer reliable sources.
She asked us to leave her alone.
I promise I'll never do it again.
Can you sing the Argentine National Anthem?
jose javier cepera summed up the fight on alternative news site rebelion.
celebration in tabriz.
egyptian blogger zeinobia expresses her annoyance with the way legendary lebanese singer fairouz is being attacked after singing in syria.
a year old girl was killed when police forces evicted a rural village in cambodia the case highlights the growing land disputes in the country and the use of violence by government forces to stifle dissent.
gvmeetup nov from tarek amr.
Let's get a bottle of whiskey.
mohamed eltaher explains the capabilities of rcs technology used by egyptian authorities after news of hacking team exporting the technology to the egyptian government.
speaking through graffiti in kazakhstan global voices.
Her face turned red.
I've been very happy.
cage homes rooms diced up or subdivided with boards and the like used to be the last resort of the city s poorest but nowadays even dice sized apartments can be packaged for the luxury market as people have become desensitized to the absurdity and have resigned themselves to even more cramped living spaces at unaffordable prices.
india is forwarding emails a crime global voices.
I will give you this book.
jordanian moey tells us what happens when his friend admits to him that he is gay in this post.
gv how did guinee solidarite help reduce the impact of poverty in guinea.
i hope what you are doing is not political i do not want you landing in trouble you know when a government wants to stay in power they become repressive they are scared of their own shadows.
You have nothing to fear.
amir muhammad s urban malaysian dictionary features commonly used words in urban malaysia the online project started in.
a homeless man smiles photo by alejandro rustom copyright demotix.
great i ll start drilling a hole in my bed sheets right away.
the list of marches please add yours to the facebook event and as a comment to this post are as follows.
What he needs most is a good job.
Tom didn't read any of the messages Mary sent to him.
el haqed aka i a ed a rapper and icon of the movement was arrested on may and remains in detention visit the campaign site for his release.
security forces dragged a convicted marvani s man in the city they dressed him as a woman and wished by this act to humiliate him the women s association of marivan condemn this action and consider it an insult to women kurdish women protested against this act one day after.
What's the next step to be done?
We have a problem.
many took offense to his statement including samar yazbek an alawite writer who supports the revolution and labeled him as sectarian yazbek asked why people fell silent after it became known that one of the alleged soldiers was sunni his response tries to clear up the point but its aggressiveness doesn t seem to have been effective.
i understand hong kong people s feelings about june but the incident happened many years ago the country s development in many areas has since achieved tremendous results and brought economic prosperity to hong kong i believe hong kong people will make an objective assessment of the nation s development.
We can do nothing about it.
blogger taku nakajima was one of those who decided to stay he articulated his thoughts in a post titled i want to be able to respect those who made a different decision jp calling for a more logical understanding of the nuanced undercurrents of our emotional struggles.
How much is it?
video one billion stories global voices.
I've been a teacher for two years.
share a text summary of the recorded content in as many languages as possible along with the content this helps others discover your work.
there are a lot of brave actions happening more and more girls posting videos of themselves driving and more and more men are joining us she says we ll continue campaigning using all the tools that we can.
Only adults may watch that film.
gv what about critics who will point out that men get abused too do you have programs available for male victims of domestic violence.
Not all Muslims observe Ramadan.
We can't forget that.
st place a group of women working against gender violence in sao paulo video maria maria.
Hands off.
Take these pills.
Mathematics is my favorite subject.
tb tom bench july.
the afore mentioned donation of fuel to malawi was the first significant display of zambia s acceptance of president banda s new government the irony of all ironies though is that in the banda administration zambian president sata s malawian lawyer ralph kasambara is now malawi s justice minister.
A little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.
I found the key that I was looking for.
some fishermen carried out underwater filming at various points along the bay where they are concerned that there is a large mass of dead or dying fish at depths that vary between and meters and also a large accumulation of sediment associated with industrial activity fishing facebook user juan antonio menares henriquez shared a video that shows what he found in the ocean dead fish everywhere on youtube diego olmos uploaded a video showing dead and dying fish visible on the shore.
global voices is very pleased to announce that sue gardner executive director of the wikimedia foundation has joined the board of global voices.
What time do you get up?
iran s main opposition has also failed to address the critical issue of ethnic minority rights in the uprising that took place in tehran against the regime in for instance the ethnic opposition did not participate as they viewed the movement as a mere derivative of the regime itself.
Thank you for the information.
Is something on your mind?
I think he won't come.
sharpening a saw to build a house in a ranch in the chaco photo by pedro gonzalez del campo used with permission from otramerica almost a year after the start of this journey pedro s trip through latin america s low lands has just begun blog de la ruta provides a glimpse into the continent s varied and complex reality you can keep up with the journey and read previous entries in the otramerica website es.
privacy companies don t disclose enough about how users information is handled including what is collected and shared with whom and under what circumstances this includes how user information is shared for targeted advertising.
desertpeace was among the first to comment and was outraged by the lack of media coverage.
If you want a new bike, you'd better start saving up.
turnout for st petersburg s legislative assembly elections dipped more than votes when compared to the last race in to just percent of eligible voters turnout was also down nationwide in both local and federal parliamentary elections.
to tell readers about the realities that tend to go unnoticed or that are invisible in the majority of industrial media and connect through networks people movements and organizations in this task of unraveling life in order to understand it and transform it.
afghans prefer wheat products over rice unlike many people living in south asia the traditional naanbai are sold at roadside shops across the country naan bakers make different kinds of naanbai sometimes two to three feet long with different designs photo by aaquib khan.
presently it is edited by mr syed arifullah he took over the charge after his father died his father ran this paper for years it was founded by his grandfather in this paper has maintained its original look and had not compromised with the urdu computer font.
She talks a lot.
acampadabcn beatings and three people detained in palma de mallorca everybody come to the san ferran police station right now menpleno.
tololy from jordan writes an eye opening post on how some men still let their mothers chose their brides for them.
chilean blogs have discussed the issue more deeply in a post titled what if we buy all together at the shopping mall es roberto carreno writes.
i give up already i m going back to my country.
uae elaborate ceremony for the new academic year global voices.
I just don't feel like going out tonight.
the fight for language the fight for identity.
He likes his school a lot.
How will he pay his debts?
I thought you'd found someone else.
We're going to Boston to see Tom.
the tragic events of friday of karamah was captured through the lens of three cameramen and recounts of eyewitnesses in a powerful documentary appropriately called karamah has no walls it is a collaborative work of yemeni youth from the heart of sanaa s change square which successfully conveys to the viewer the emotions fears and calamity of that bloody day the documentary is beautifully directed by yemeni female director sara ishaq yemyogini.
He likes watching TV.
egypt local rule and the right to housing global voices.
I think they saw me.
map showing territorial claims in the south china sea public domain.
arabs read a quarter of a page a year global voices.
rosario has been given many nicknames one of them is the argentinian chicago since it was the main port for grain and it also hosted a number of sicilian mobsters like chicho grande and chicho chico among others newspaper la nacion es writes about this nickname.
from bahrain silly bahraini girl posts two videos one showing a rap song by saudis targeted against egyptians and the other containing a response for the first video.
I congratulate you on your success.
bhutan teachers abusing students global voices.
You'd better go.
the logo is designed by kar chun.
She accepted his hand in marriage.
the original dictionary by kotora jinbo and shozaburo kanazawa contained mistakes misheard words and even broken phrases expressions that are inconceivable with original ainu grammar we deleted all questionable words and examples items that were extremely different from setsu kurokawa s audio and words that setsu kurokawa was unfamiliar with double entries were basically consolidated to one entry however since the video data and audio data were recorded separately there are cases where the ainu expression is different in the video and audio in those cases only we decided that these were separate expressions and listed both in the end we had headwords for particularly rare words we checked whether they were used in existing dictionaries and added notes to them.
Eat whatever you like.
knowing is just being able to accumulate it.
I went to Osaka station.
for upcoming events related to the future of citizen rights in the digital age see the global voices events calendar.
The doctor's office is on the second floor.
English is not easy, but it is interesting.
erin kang pointed out the absurdity of the government action at the eve of the world conservation congress in jeju.
a screenshot of jolie s film page on imdb com.
The letter returned.
pioneering theatre in azerbaijan offers a stage to actors with disabilities global voices.
kuwait.
after five years of college i graduated as a pharmacist i found a job at a local pharmacy that had a vacancy and started working right away one week into the job i found out that i must take turns with my other colleague who has the night shift to wipe floors and dust shelves i thought great i really needed continuous four hour lab training lectures for this and left the job immediately.
I wish to be a doctor.
I wish to go to Hawaii.
Do you study English?
the ish.
tommy edison has been blind since birth and through youtube videos he shows us how he deals with certain activities that present challenges to him such as using paper money atms dvd players and crossing streets he is also a movie critic and his humorous reviews provide us with a glimpse in how the visually impaired enjoy life.
the storymaker app is designed to help citizen journalists tell stories more effectively for a digital audience and includes lessons templates and basic editing capabilities stories are uploaded to youtube and displayed on storymaker cc to ensure privacy it is possible to use a secure tor network connection to protect the user s identity.
global voices gv what kind of work has your organization done in the scope of domestic violence in armenia thus far.
index on censorship says.
Listen to me, Tom.
This beach is a popular tourist spot.
costa rica climbing up chirripo the country s tallest peak global voices.
kuwaiti blogger bo amo od ar announces that the uae will increase the salaries of all its government employees by per cent beginning next year.
This word has two meanings.
photos budapest s unique brand of urban art global voices.
Tom seemed bored.
meanwhile prime minister mohammed salem basendwah announced a donation of million riyals for the benefit of the families of the martyrs on the anniversary of karama day video uploaded by belaquood.
Who do you want to speak to?
Tom was eating dinner when Mary arrived.
Both of them are in the room.
Don't you want to watch TV?
they wanted to deny families the right to hate a regime that has killed jailed and kidnapped their children a scene in salaheddin aleppo syria photo freedom house cc by.
a view of the niger river from the embankment of sekoro mali.
written date homs the besieged area.
There was nothing I could do for Tom.
bozorgmehr hosseinpour s illustration of isfahani girls isfahan acidpashi.
it s a beautiful perfect arc that begins with is this the year haruki murakami receives the nobel prize and invariably ends with him getting passed over.
I learned to play guitar when I was ten years old.
interested candidates please send cv and letter of interest explaining why you d be a good candidate for the job to editor at globalvoicesonline dot org.
if you re interested in japanese horror movies youtube channel one hundred years of cinema s short minute documentary style overview of the genre is for you.
egypt now tv program on blogging global voices.
i slowly started to lose contact with japan i kept up with japanese news and my friends as those things were part of my identity but i began shedding values and judgments about people and viewing others through a less biased lens.
"But don't you think that it's a little big?" asked the shopkeeper.
it is nothing new that there are a lot of unsavory men and women hanging out in public places in libya and a bunch of sleazy looking men following after any women like a pack of dogs this becomes an issue because it is hard to tell who is who sometimes.
new year in vietnam in.
in the eastern democratic republic of congo where civil war has taken more than four million lives children as young as six are routinely recruited by militias and taught to kill it is estimated that children most between and years old make up of combatants in the region.
She told us not to make a noise.
i vote bg was created by institute for public environment development iped a nonprofit organization supporting political and social change in bulgaria iped works to increase citizen participation in the bulgarian government limiting the influence of the mafia in politics securing a fair electoral process and combating corruption and abuse of power the platform s goal is to promote the rights of voters in bulgaria to answer most frequently asked questions about the upcoming election to assist in reporting violations of the electoral process and to aggregate election news published in the media.
irrenhaeusler compares the germany s news coverage with taiwan s.
palestine family guy anti semitic global voices.
iran nuclear bomb and blackmail global voices.
I bought a watch.
Don't worry. This won't happen again.
a clean internet for iran image with broom by nesster on flickr cc by sa.
I love you.
You have no fever.
assad as eye doctor via saad hajo facebook page used under cc by.
the protest in kabul was not an isolated event on july dozens of people took to the streets of bamyan to call attention to shakila s case.
We didn't believe it.
syria dark memories of global voices.
Make a good translation of the sentence that you are translating. Don't let translations into other languages influence you.
I don't mind either way.
hassan reportedly has been charged with being a member of the february media network calling for and participating in public demonstrations inciting hatred against the government and being in contact with exiled members of the the bahraini opposition multiple sources have reported that he has been beaten while in prison and forced to confess to charges against him.
conveying the general feeling of these elections another voter nullified his vote by writing i will not choose between a killer and a traitor down with military rule glory to martyrs image by mobteloon facebook.
what more can i say.
firas atraqchi al jazeera ignores iraq today not even news alerts keeping up with events there feb.
inspired by google s transparency report twitter released its own report on july providing information on government requests for user information government requests to withhold content and the digital millennium copyright act takedown notices received from copyright holders according to the report the united states government has made the most requests for user information since january.
The swans migrate from here to Florida.
the european parliament has overwhelmingly rejected the anti counterfeiting trade agreement acta which opponents argued unfairly favored the rights of copyright holders over the rights of internet users one commentary in the guardian newspaper argues that the treaty stood no chance however euronews points out that the battle for internet freedom is far from over infojustice reports that the fight now turns to the trans pacific partnership tpp which critics denounce for being shrouded in secrecy.
I got my foot caught in a train door.
Keep children away from medicine.
I remember mailing the letter.
If you don't hurry, you'll miss the train.
on that day bloggers will recommend other blogs to their blog visitors with the goal in mind on this day every blogger will post a recommendation of new blogs this way all blog readers will find themselves leaping around and discovering new previously unknown blogs.
ukrainian photographer maxim dondyuk dondyuk is documenting the tb epidemic in ukraine each day people die each year takes more than lives dondyuk s powerful heartbreaking photographs of tb patients can be viewed online on his tumblr blog ru his website and on lightstalkers com en on sep an exhibition of dondyuk s work opens in moscow ru at the andrei sakharov museum and public center.
I believe Tom is right.
this video posted on youtube by enoughgaddafi is from benghazi.
mahmood al yousif from bahrain is not surprised that parliament cleared ministers of any wrongdoing in this post.
damnit what the hell is our country doing.
You may speak.
I've promised Tom that I'd be there.
Take a look at that.
why are asians shorter.
partnership.
japan time lapse tokyo global voices.
Did you actually see the accident?
I'm going to leave school.
It's not rocket science.
will jones who works as a researcher at the centre for refugee studies at oxford university visited the camp three years ago writing on the forced migration review webpage he says the camp isn t what most people would expect.
i didn t cry because of the occupation thing i didn t cry because the teacher said that the whole lebanese soil was occupied and that he was wrong i did because it was the first time i felt like a stranger a minority or an intruder.
jordanian roba al assi attended a concert by legendary lebanese singer fairuz and here s her preview of the event.
a social network for wikileaks supporters global voices.
people scream bonjour at her from windowsills and alleyways reads example describes a common occurrence in the kingdom belle goes on and on about how much she loves something which basically requires the nice goat man to give it to her you often see this in morocco.
She usually goes to bed at nine.
worldwide protests planned in support of gaza global voices.
Will you be here tomorrow?
caricature of ex police chief cho hyun oh image by flickr user okkokin cc by nd.
united sounds on soundcloud is compiling the largest collection of audio recordings of the un universal declaration of human rights in more than languages if you speak a language they don t yet have you can submit an audio recording the un has probably already translated you just have to read it out loud.
Give me the spoon.
they re partying this friday to make america great again in russia global voices.
attorney dr mousa mohammed al qarni former university professor and human right activist detained in february.
a user of balatarin a popular iranian link sharing site published a fake photo and said as a joke now the municipality in tehran will rename ladan street to martyr bin ladan.
egyptian twitter user themiinz gathered pictures of nullified ballots with humourous messages.
sierra leone postcards from freetown then and now global voices.
This book is difficult to understand.
Did you have a good time on your trip to London?
tor users on the rise in turkey global voices.
shwedagon pagoda photo by michel meynsbrughen flickr cc license.
If I get rich, I will buy it.
He painted his bicycle red.
They were attacked.
angkor wat photo by juan antonio f segal flickr cc license.
saah tambah explains how he became infected and his life since his recovery.
Do you know the answer?
even those who do not personally agree with his radical ideas have to bow today to this living legend as vera froes pt.
after this unusual dialogue paquito suggested to the authorities in march that they should support an international un declaration to eliminate criminal penalties and other human rights violations based on sexual orientation and gender identity and they did in june.
meet the smartest child in egypt zeinobia has the story.
blogger arrests in ethiopia violate articles of the iccpr freezone bloggers http bit ly g munm.
I'm still looking for a job.
the google translate blog announces the addition of five new alpha languages for its online translation service including armenian azerbaijani and georgian likely to be considered in the same way in azerbaijan and georgia the armenian observer applauds the move even at such an early stage and says the service is especially valuable.
on google plus bahman daroshafaei quotes fa a year old witness who was sent by his school to hear ahmadinejad s speech.
we escaped to tell the truth another day and tell it we must especially with all of our talks about honesty and how mama and daddy aren t perfect but this scene took my mind back to those days outta mama s house on my own in college boy was i a trip couldn t seem to spell abstinence it was like i was on soul train at the scramble board arranging letters the i was missing my approach to sexuality was both dangerous and unhealthy to my physical and emotional well being.
The library is on the 4th floor.
at the end of the day riot police evicted the square with violence as different photo reporters de illustrated.
Hey, listen to me.
figuring out how when this term expires can be a difficult task because it differs from one country to the next and varies depending on the work in question for example books and other literary works are protected in the arab world from the moment the work is created for the entire lifetime of the author plus or years after his death.
the terrorist donkey posted a new story ar about racism in lebanon this time it happened in a very well known bank where they refused to open an account for a man from nepal.
tasked with regulating the communications and information technology sector with the aim of achieving a highly competitive environment for the provision of superior services to end users and an attractive ecosystem for investors the citc is responsible for censoring thousands of websites and sending content removal requests to social media platforms.
I'll be playing tennis with Tom this afternoon, but it's not something I'm really looking forward to.
gulnar alfidatli a year old actress at sa has cerebral palsy she has an accounting degree and had a job at a private company but was fired she said after her bosses realized she had a disability sa is my first theatre experience she said she recalled her first performance which got a standing ovation it was like we were in a magical dream she said.
Does Tom like tomatoes?
Many museums are closed on Mondays.
china kim jong un photoshop meme global voices.
Tom likes to read.
kowshik provides bn the scope of the visit.
blogger bachai sako tj on why people in tajikistan should not celebrate halloween today.
My name doesn't appear on the list.
iraq the model discusses the security situation in basra.
Tom doesn't like watching baseball.
Are you all ready?
wafaa al natheema condemned the attacks against hospitals in baghdad.
isn t their website quite the eyesore.
accused protesters painting their initials on their t shirts photo by vanco dzambaski cc by nc sa.
on friday december the tunisian bloggers waged the white note campaign to protest against censorship which is growing to a tremendous extent in tunisia.
The parcel weighs more than one pound.
since the ongoing crisis has generated chronic shortages of basic goods and services like paper electricity and broadband internet these shortages combined with political efforts to limit public access to information and news have created a tense and highly controlled landscape for communication and the sharing of information.
emmasulieman more photos with fsa in the free syria they have tanks now.
I don't think he's coming.
I met him on the street the other day.
for the index the ranking digital rights research team evaluated companies from countries china france india korea malaysia mexico qatar russia south africa spain the uk the us and the uae whose products and services are accessed by a majority of the world s billion internet users.
rick martin is maintaining a list of ways to donate to japan.
You should've told Tom the truth.
though most expats don t plan on living in qatar during the world cup many reveled in the good news.
is the saudi government monitoring women global voices.
Whose books are those?
through their photographs and interviews claudia and daniela hope to show that honduras is a country full of hard working people people with dreams ambitions joys and sorrows just like in every corner of the world.
Picasso was a famous painter.
Does he know what you did?
Have you finished reading that novel?
You can read between the lines.
She's your typical workaholic.
This play has three acts.
What made you come here?
for the last few years every nowruz spring equinox festival marked in iran and across central asia karimov would dance a traditional dance in front of journalists and diplomats largely it seemed to prove he was still fit.
why do italians look like people from the north caucasus.
The birds sang.
It is unfortunately true.
i was thrilled i thought that i could finally read ali s posts i was certain that ali would have a lot to say about the protests and the brutal crackdown on the innocent civilians i thought that ali had a rich material for his blog knowing that people in the middle east are fighting for their rights.
It isn't new.
Call the police!
why are iranians fighting in syria.
Add up these figures.
the speech from the ruling by judge oyarbide can be seen in a video es on youtube.
iranian blogger hossein ronaghi maleki freed on bail global voices.
shame peru government rented the national stadium today for a salsa concert on the same day of the anniversary of our biggest football tragedy killed.
users report that this has ocurred before and there are other threads from reporting similar issues however the problem never has lasted this long and never before caught the attention of the mainstream media a few days ago one of the main venezuelan newspapers ultimas noticias es reported.
Stop teasing your sister!
market square in phnom penh photo by lebailly.
Not all children like apples.
I'm sorry for what happened.
I felt my phone vibrating in my pocket.
dmitry olshansky a columnist at the pro kremlin tabloid komsomolskaya pravda has nothing in common with ivan yakovina but they still belong to the same group in their views on trump olshansky has recently described hillary clinton as pure evil and compared donald trump by contrast to the fresh breeze from an open window in a room that had not been aired since nixon s s trump seems happy to encourage self proclaimed russian patriots like olshansky judging by his most recent comment on crimea.
She has beautiful eyes.
I don't believe you. You're always lying.
the police will take it seriously if they find people are taking seriously.
I didn't mean to hurt you.
He plays the piano better than I do.
e algeria a digitisation programme launched in the country years ago turned out to be a fiasco g was heralded years ago not to mention that public administration lacks any web presence.
How did you know what she wanted?
My car is German.
watcher com ua reports uk that according to a month study of million downloads by million computers in countries conducted by pando networks romania kbps bulgaria kbps lithuania kbps and latvia kbps have the second third fourth and fifth highest download speeds in the world while ukraine has been ranked kbps.
as i described the documentary in my blog post.
amber mountain national park lies km south of diego suarez in the north of madagascar its humid tropical forest stretches more than hectares across volcanic mountain it is because of this humidity that the forest is a source of of the region s annual rainfall here you will also find six lakes as well as several waterfalls and rivers.
in morocco hijab is certainly a choice young and old alike don the headscarf and in big cities seeing it is as common as not seeing it although in rural areas it is more prevalent all women have legal freedom of choice whether or not to wear it everything morocco explains moroccan dress accurately.
I don't know exactly when I will be back.
I've got a headache.
Tom showed me the poems that he'd written when he was a teenager.
in order to dive deeper into the reasoning behind the strike global voices interviewed one of the strikers carlos arturo gamboa bobadilla a pioneer blogger in the colombian blogsphere as well as a writer activist teacher and president of the university professor union association aspu despite his physical fatigue he reported thoroughly on the strike on his blog and facebook page because as he himself expressed in one of his posts i don t think i could ever be a silent protester i wasn t born to be a high priest of silence.
She got good grades in English.
I liked the room overlooking the valley.
feira de santana brazil paula goes.
a woman volunteering to clean protest grounds in kyiv photo by the creator of facebook page maidaners used with permission.
Promise me you won't get mad if I tell you.
I take a bath almost every day.
The girl released the birds from the cage.
Thank you for the pleasant evening.
at cuban cardinal jaime ortega cannot complain about his lack of recognition another perspective on the work and influence of the head of the catholic church in cuba by havana times.
How many gifts do you think she received last holiday season?
video from the event by rfe rl radio free afghanistan can be watched here more photos from the protest can be accessed here.
how do you think the internet would look like if censorship was prohibited by law.
My uncle gave me his car.
egypt final round of the presidential elections in photographs global voices.
Has Tom really come back?
He pretended to be a doctor.
I'll buy a watch for my son.
in a group of young diggers protested for not getting paid one of the protesters was reportedly murdered by a security company officer from a diamond field the officer hasn t been charged so far.
We have to do this again tomorrow.
please meet ali khalil our new addition to the arabic lingua our arabic site is now run by ali and rawan gharib.
former egyptian president hosni mubarak image by agencia brasil creative commons atribuicao brasil.
All aboard!
upcoming events.
the government of boyko borisov fell on feb after a month of incessant protests and in less than five days on may bulgarian citizens will elect a new parliament an in depth gv text is here.
in order to help our readers see the difference between the two versions of the chinese history i cut the collage into photo sets with a brief explanation.
they both boast an outstanding collection of photos of these gorgeous little known historical sites.
i have been puzzled by the charm of communication and the cruelty resulted from the lack of it since i can remember i belong to a generation who stayed suspended and open since that moment where the egyptian revolution sparked in the th of january longing for the new and the fulfilling for example the new having fun trend at that time were international national days where each country could get a showy corner of its culture.
here are some crocodile sightings and news reports in chonburi crocodiles escaped from the million years stone park pattaya crocodile farm after four days the park chief said they recaptured crocodiles but some were still missing the park announced a reward of baht for those who can provide information about the whereabouts of the escaped reptiles.
It's really bothering me.
Health is more important than wealth.
there are several photos from around the world shared in the mad graffiti week facebook photo album showing how people around the world supported the initiative.
What did you do with those books?
helping to stop them starting with the atrocities occurring against the children of syria.
I don't come here very often.
he explains.
we have no political intention we don t understand politics but we can cry for our loss to extend that cry to another level we want to go to the divided titas and ask for local people s opinions.
tim davies what does internet governance have to do with open data.
the panama canal i visited is now a tiny little canal compared to what s being inaugurated today.
in the th century ainu elder and politician shigeru kayano who died in helped popularize ainu language culture in japan in well known books such as our land was a forest kayano also produced a simple ainu phrasebook that is still in print.
Tom, what's wrong with you tonight?
I've never seen Tom dance.
There is not enough demand for this product.
When I woke us this morning, I didn't want to get out of bed.
It was such a shock.
Go to church with your parents and pray for her.
on wednesday august th over people including university professors and human rights defenders signed an online petition calling on israeli pilots to refuse to bomb iran if they are ordered to do so.
the language of narration is yucatan maya.
Did you hear that sound?
esal a seven year old girl was born in a country where everything is blue and square shaped one day an alien object pink and spherical turns up close to her house when it offers her the chance to leave behind the hard edges of her homeland and travel through a world of different forms and colors she seizes it.
Who wrote this poem?
the revolution is personal.
joe i denounce this coup that was conceived by armed bandits who are sell outs of francophone africa against mali and its democratically elected president.
christopher frecynet still alive they heard him screaming rue nord alexis call cousin daphney.
royal abdications netherlands belgium will spain be next global voices.
She used to visit me regularly.
He must be over sixty.
two other attendees an investigative journalist and a law student found common ground to discuss how laws related to freedom of information in egypt need to be changed for journalists to carry out their work.
in order to remedy his disturbing temptations saudi cleric muhammad al habadan proposes a highly convenient solution for women one eyed veil.
I'll be here all day.
I stay in Osaka.
I'm giving up smoking.
Is this your first visit?
All right. It's a deal.
I know where you live.
janet gunter showcases a local ngo bitonga divers that strives to protect marine life by making positive links between protecting sea life tourism and economic development here is a video of their work pt.
I admire his courage.
hollaback is a crowdsourced platform seeking to harness the power of mobile technologies to denounce street harassment more than a tool or series of tools hollaback is self described as a movement.
taima a graduate in translation from yarmouk university said that she gets paid as much now as she did during her freelancing years as a student.
and have been crucial in terms of elections in africa over the course of these two years there have been elections to date.
imagine if every poster on the wall every advertisement on the side of a bus hanging in the center of every wall in an office and even overlooking little children playing in kindergarten was the face of one man.
Every cloud has a silver lining.
well that s for all of us to decide together but my personal goal is to help us grow our audience bigger and reach out to mainstream media journalists more effectively in the future i think the different regional sections of global voices will operate more independently with their various translation partners organizationally it s a big challenge grow bigger and at the same time remain decentralized flexible and welcoming without compromising on quality.
As soon as she heard the bell ring, she answered the telephone.
I got up at seven this morning.
Have a seat.
the sit in in front of the palace was attacked on december th which resulted deaths and much more left injured testimonies of anti morsi protesters being tortured at the hands of morsi supporters began surfacing later various walls were erected around the palace to prevent protesters from approaching these walls were targets of graffiti artists as well.
This happened a long time ago.
nama jafari blogger and journalist was arrested he was editor of a cultural site he also wrote a book called a gathering in solitary confinement.
way to go cinescape it s now even less attractive to watch movies there.
My father has gone to China.
ellery biddle is global voices new advocacy director global voices advox.
the following are photographs taken by ramy raoof on january and and posted to flickr captions are photographer s own.
layal el katib is a lebanese blogger who lived in egypt for a while and here are her experiences as a lebanese living in egypt.
for the first time in years karimov is not in control of uzbekistan.
akram al halabi s love comes first on the football field of majdal shams village occupied golan heights photo by nihad awaidat and diala madah courtesy of akram al halabi all rights reserved to the authors.
Don't touch me!
The city is gaining popularity as a major tourist destination.
rosangela basso from the blog maria da penha neles posted a series of pictures and a video of a sociology student from the university of brasilia unb being assaulted by security guards at the federal senate while protesting against the new forestry code.
journalist haythem el mekki who has filed such a complaint is not confident about the seriousness of the judicial process i did not get any response about my complaint although this does not surprise me he told global voices.
She raised her hands.
recently the social networking sites blog facebook are flooded with a video nothing extra ordinary but a a news report on ekushey tv its the first episode of the three part fetaure on transit the video is the proof how a road was built dividing titas river and killing it in the name of providing transit facility many internet users are watching this video especially those who have never seen titas or those who are simply interested to see how a road can be built dividing a river.
moreover students often find themselves witnessing dangerous tribal clashes on campus since tribal rule is predominant in jordan and the inner problems of tribes can often find their way into educational institutions through youth.
Tom didn't want to go to the movie.
here is an iranian rappers s song for people in homs in syria.
viral graphic commemorating the third anniversary of the rabaa massacre shared on facebook by peter youssef.
They agreed on a price.
while the internet under rouhani has not broken free we can observe three trends in iran s virtual world.
as anyone who has ever attended or taught at a japanese school can tell you school lunch kyuushoku is the most important part of the day.
photograph of the munition taken in ein tarma th aug source eintarma coordinating s facebook page.
I don't have money.
djamel ghanem via algerie focus used with permission.
the fmln s presidential ticket headed by current vice president salvador sanchez ceren is expected to attract the majority of the votes in comparison to the opposition but not to garner more than the needed to avoid a runoff election.
this post is part of our special coverage global development.
dubai car fires under investigation global voices.
in mexico city.
veteran egyptian blogger alaa abdel fattah is being held in egypt under trumped up charges and bahraini blogger ali abdulemam has been in hiding in bahrain where he too faces charges related to his blogging activism both are among the pioneering bloggers in their countries.
the southeast asia digital library provides educators and students with materials published in southeast asia the online library contains digital facsimiles of books and manuscripts as well as multimedia materials and searchable indexes of additional southeast asian resources.
I'm ready.
Are you doing that on purpose?
our reporters use state of the art dslr cameras that also allow the user to take clear and crisp video of the events that take place the cameras are also equipped with gps taggers so any photo of an event is also tagged with the gps coordinates of the event to ensure factual information gathering we use satellite phones and satellite internet connection to pass information from the war zone in south kordofan to our editing studio based outside of sudan in the editing studio we edit the video footage to create to minute video reports or features we also edit all text reports coming from the field our team of editors is primary based of sudanese as well we then post the reports to our website.
Tom almost forgot the conference.
The train leaves at nine o'clock.
I did it myself.
When in Rome, do as the Romans do.
people left their marks on shirts fences their homes and clothing.
I also went.
botswana daily life in nata village global voices.
You should eat more fruit.
Darwin changed the world.
ha can you say a word about the situation right now in bahrain and what happens with activists who are there who are struggling for their rights how is the situation is it getting worse is it getting better.
Many Native American communities need doctors and teachers.
elmer alvarez had already been taking photographs of people around guatemala before starting the facebook page humans of guatemala in september wendy del aguila who now writes the captions told elmer about humans of new york and he felt motivated to start a similar page about guatemala.
bellavista santiago chile photo by patricia vargas used with permission.
There isn't any soap.
I have not finished my homework yet.
Their wedding will be tomorrow.
from our partners.
This bus will take you to the airport.
That's the stupidest thing I've ever said.
I like short hair.
Do you see the raccoon?
The door is locked.
I'm at home.
The audience applauded the actress.
I know what you're trying to do.
click here to view the paper ar.
I am familiar with this neighborhood.
the occupiers have decided to implement the israeli style ghettos of imprisoning people in concrete walls when this didn t solve their problem they came to the idea of mass slaughter of the whole of sadr city using mass bombing rockets and heavy artillery against a civil population.
walking underneath the full bloom of sakura can feel like walking through a floral tunnel photo taken april by flickr user coniferconifer cc by.
her majesty queen rania of jordan has been given the honor of youtube s first visionary award for her outreach to youth encouraging them to confront and deconstruct stereotypes of the muslim world we are always so impressed with her courage vision and leadership.
He told us an interesting story.
several iranian sites and blogs such as demokracy reported that face book and twitter got filtered in iran ghomar says president ahmadinejad wants to beat his rivals in the presidential election and they are much more present than him in the world of internet including face book.
You're the apple of my eye.
Look after Tom.
Give me the key.
the protest ended in euphoria as the most active painting protesters also lit flares the last stop was the parliament building which also got a dose of color.
From the direction that he was going in, I would say he was headed to town.
chemical castration is already in use in germany sweden and some states in the united states south korea would be the first country in asia to implement such a measure.
at the end of last year custer launched a fundraising appeal on kickstarter to make the documentary following generous responses of more than people the project has successfully raised more than and custer has since then spent much of his free time tracking interviewing and filming parents and kidnapped children.
audio cassette digitization workshop photo provided by the ubc library and used with permission from indigitization.
It is unfortunately true.
We're out of sugar.
My house is big.
Tom is in the house.
My father is rich.
reports moroccan site mamfakinch on the plight of a young prisoner.
Are you going with us?
still ammar also seems to want to be rid of social media networks.
China is a huge country.
but nowadays kyrgyz writers lack opportunities to forge contacts with international publishers said dalmira tilepbergenova president of the pen center for central asia which is seeking funding to train writers in basic english in order to help them reach international markets some seek private sponsors some donor organizations while others put their own money towards publishing costs.
hashtag freezone bloggers.
what makes people truly angry would be the feeling of inequality it is perhaps the perfect time to extend the investigation from the individual celebrity to the whole nation.
pen american center has issued a report demonstrating the chilling effects of surveillance on writers several writers reported self censoring when writing about the middle east.
men should have control over themselves they shouldn t be controlled by instinct and fantasy women should dress for self respect not by wearing a burqa and also by not wearing clothes that reveal too much when they are sure they can be seen just as a sex object and not as persons whose personality should be respected.
a homeless man was being transported in an ambulance after suffering a seizure all of a sudden the paramedics noticed something unusual the man s dog was desperately following the ambulance he kept going for some kilometers until he was finally allowed to enter the vehicle and join his owner.
i am sorry my blog has now been banned by bagan isp i bought my own domain with my own money and redirected it so that the readers can easily view my site when they isp started banning blogspot and wordpress now i can t do anything anymore however i have been writing in my blog since and i will continue to write here no matter how blogs are banned because there is mail to blogger system where i can e mail the posts from any address i will continue to write in my blog i value my life as a blogger for every post i had written i had put a lot of effort in writing my experiences.
colorful revolution protesters lighting flares in front of alexander the great fountain in skopje photo by vanco dzambaski cc by nc sa.
u s bills could threaten the global internet global voices.
My brother is small but strong.
after the announcement of results many activists celebrated.
local communities which help syrian children.
little forest is also within close proximity to other local communities sharing such close quarters has sometimes led to tensions particularly about waste disposal according to help refugees a charity the authorities have failed to provide the forced migrants with adequate waste collection facilities.
Let's not waste time arguing about it.
Don't touch these.
I have two cousins.
world heritage site djemila algeria in jeopardy global voices.
Merry Christmas!
kazakhstan s leader of the nation nursultan nazarbayev not only sings but also plays a musical instrument.
Where is the problem?
this means that there is one language for every people on earth europe alone accounts for only of them whereas in asia languages are spoken on a daily basis we hope to offer the declaration in as many of them as possible even in artificial languages from solresol to esperanto there are auxlangs in which the declaration would look great too and with your help and luck we can even hope to reach impromptu translators of those languages that have just a single speaker.
new science on the pause has come forward that was not in time to be included in the ipcc report this includes studies showing that a likely cause is the increased absorption of heat by the oceans further studies will undoubtedly follow this year s temperatures are once again breaking records indicating the pause may be ending.
I think I understand.
i discovered this at the airport in moscow a space food vending machine that sells borscht beef and buckwheat soup dried fruit kompot and other foods sold in a tube as space food for rubles.
online accounts are frequently hacked and stolen we often hear of those who hacked someone s email or stole someone s email password twitter is no different so the saudi tweep and blogger manal al sherif who has worked as a information security consultant in an oil company for years shared her tips on how to protect twitter accounts from being hacked ar.
palestine oldest woman alive global voices.
digital citizen global voices advox.
here is a picture of the same place taken on.
a photo of two serbian politicians riding a motorcycle together has gone viral across social media.
in this interview asif sheikh the ceo and co founder of a media talks to global voices online about the project.
You're an angel!
Please don't ask.
The guy standing over there is Tom.
I've heard nothing.
these political disputes all took place within the tense context of bombings assassinations and official sit ins the situation was further exacerbated when in the march led government dismantled hizbollah s communications network following an official consideration of its illegality.
this classic ukrainian cartoon can help parents talk about human trafficking global voices.
bahrain soap hanging from trees global voices.
Both of my parents don't know how to swim.
why do brazilians speak portuguese.
My room key, please.
Are those your dogs?
I wanted to buy one of Tom's paintings.
She looked as if she hadn't eaten in days.
Do you know how many tourists come to Boston every day?
akbar montakhabi blogger and journalist writes fa.
further reading.
i started my own blog sort of late in the game i think my motivation was mainly professional but i ve kept it goofy enough that it still feels personal it s really nice to have a place to say what i think i have a second blog in danish together with my father dan larsen called blogbyblog dk we write about internet media and technology.
foreign notes writes about rinat akhmetov ukraine s richest man.
the countdown has already begun in north korea.
if you care about this issue you can see how custer is progressing on the documentary at the dedicated website www livingwithdeadhearts com or learn more about kidnapped children in a special section of chinageeks org if you wish to show your support visit the chinese charities baby come home and xinxing aid which support kidnapped and street children in various ways.
madrid june photo by and courtesy of cristina mari cristinagayart.
new beginnings.
what is unwra billion annual budget to teach this to the gaza kids hate war nakba day http t co fey tgmyl pic twitter com oytdme fhm.
in bangladesh a sociologist and aids activist kathryn b ward has created a series of safe sex posters featuring mr bunny a rear view mirror toy holding condoms on this poster he says in bangla i have condoms and money let s make love smart rabbits always wear use condoms.
We went out in spite of the rain.
It's too dangerous!
personal like what.
when content is blocked by means of dns tampering the domain name server does not respond to the internet protocol ip request when a specific web address is entered in the browser the ip request is prevented from being carried out meanwhile http filtering blocks access to information whose principal code contains a syntax seen as invalid by the system.
kuwait.
This story is about Tom.
in the wake of advancements from the islamic state is which has been savvy in its use of social media us based social networks such as twitter and facebook have struggled with whether to censor graphic content while in some cases the social networks have chosen to suspend accounts such regulation has been inconsistent at times in a piece for slate digital citizen contributor jillian york asks if censoring the group online could backfire.
They became man and wife.
It's cold today.
This is too big.
south korea youtube video on saving jeju village from naval base construction global voices.
We have to help.
They fell one after another.
Why are you going?
our christmas turkey it s celsius in santiago so santa is wearing shorts.
My hands and legs are swollen.
muslim countries where gays are not prosecuted by the law global voices.
How you've grown!
Tom often drives slightly over the speed limit.
early on the morning of august a state of emergency was declared across egypt as security forces violently broke up sit ins organized by muslim brotherhood supporters protesting the ouster of mohamed morsi egypt s first freely elected president and a former high level official in the muslim brotherhood leaving up to people dead in one day the sit in at rabaa el adaweya square was the largest sit in to be raided as the shooting took place armored bulldozers were on site and helicopters circled over the scene.
I've been asked to help you.
yes yes of course what do you suggest ghassan attempted to speak as smoothly as he could muster.
sovereigns of cyberspace.
The doctor took his pulse.
world global march against the syrian dictator global voices.
I'm in a hurry today.
I'll give you a call.
It's hot.
Don't use this faucet.
tango down user anonymouswiki owns up to the web attacks on the websites of the prime minister the parliament and other government entities screenshot twitter anonymouswiki.
What are you reading?
My father likes pizza very much.
government should take austere initiative to blackout such cases if a person is found as a criminal and arrested in a rape case then there should be only one punishment for him sentence to death.
paterson hopes her project will be a treat for future generations she thinks it will be just like reading an undiscovered antique text.
ukrainian wikipedia has given awards to the top photographers in the national segment of the international photo contest wiki loves earth which celebrates natural monuments and protected areas.
all things pakistan wonders if dubai in the united arab emirates is the new political centre for pakistan.
We haven't seen you in the past four years.
I will not blame him for the accident.
Tom turned the lights off.
funny how tastes can change.
the representative of the rural workers lawyers association aatr pedro diamantino in an act in support of the quilombola rio dos macacos community which took place on february explained pt the legal framework.
in syria regime loyalists use art as a tool of war global voices.
elephants stuck in mud image by abraham banda norman carr safaris.
colombia anti personnel mines and the remangate campaign global voices.
uganda soldiers for peace or oil global voices.
War broke out in 1941.
even after super strong quakes the roads in japan are still flatter than those in taiwan.
French is spoken in France.
since the government of kuwait has ramped up efforts to control online speech and activity according to human rights watch twitter user musab shamsah was sentenced to five years in prison for a tweet that commented on theological differences between sunni and shia muslims.
You are rich.
There was a car accident yesterday.
He fooled her.
Can I go swimming, Mother?
there is no occupation.
